---
title: "IMO 1970 SL 1"
description: "Consider a regular 2n-gon and the n diagonals of it that"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1970
type: "shortlist"
number: 1
origin: "BEL"
weight: 197000001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1970 SL 1

**Origin:** BEL

## Problem

Consider a regular 2n-gon and the n diagonals of it that
pass through its center. Let P be a point of the inscribed circle and let
a1, a2, . . . , an be the angles in which the diagonals mentioned are visible
from the point P. Prove that
n

i=1
tan2 ai = 2ncos2 \pi
2n
sin4 \pi
2n
.

## Solution

Denote respectively by R and r the radii of the circumcircle and incircle,
by A1, . . . , An, B1, . . . , Bn ,the vertices of the 2n-gon and by O its center.
Let P ′ be the point symmetric to P with respect to O. Then AiP ′BiP
is a parallelogram, and applying cosine theorem on triangles AiBiP and
PP ′Bi yields
4R2 = PA2
i + PB2
i −2PAi \cdot PBi cos ai
4r2 = PB2
i + P ′B2
i −2PBi \cdot P ′Bi cos \anglePBiP ′.
Since AiP ′BiP is a parallelogram, we have that P ′Bi = PAi and
\anglePBiP ′ = \pi −ai. Subtracting the expression for 4r2 from the one for
4R2 yields 4(R2 −r2) = −4PAi \cdot PBi cos ai = −8S\triangleAiBiP cot ai, hence
we conclude that
tan2 ai =
4S2
\triangleAiBiP
(R2 −r2)2 .
(1)
Denote by Mi the foot of the perpendicular from P to AiBi and let mi =
PMi. Then S\triangleAiBiP = Rmi. Substituting this into (1) and adding up
these relations for i = 1, 2, . . ., n, we obtain
n

i=1
tan2 ai =
4R2
(R2 −r2)2

n

i=1
m2
i

.
Note that all the points Mi lie on a circle with diameter OP and form
a regular n-gon. Denote its center by F. We have that m2
i = \parallel−−\to
PMi\parallel2 =
\parallel−−\to
FMi −−−\to
FP\parallel2 = \parallel−−\to
FMi2\parallel+ \parallel−−\to
FP 2\parallel−2⟨−−\to
FMi, −−\to
FP⟩= r2/2 −2⟨−−\to
FMi, −−\to
FP⟩.
From this it follows that n
i=1 m2
i = 2n(r/2)2 −2 n
i=1⟨−−\to
FMi, −−\to
FP⟩=
2n(r/2)2 −2⟨n
i=1
−−\to
FMi, −−\to
FP⟩= 2n(r/2)2, because n
i=1
−−\to
FMi = −\to0 . Thus
n

i=1
tan2 ai =
4R2
(R2 −r2)2 2n
r
= 2n
(r/R)2
(1 −(r/R)2)2 = 2ncos2 \pi
2n
sin4 \pi
2n
.
Remark. For n = 1 there is no regular 2-gon. However, if we think of a
2-gon as a line segment, the statement will remain true.
