---
title: "IMO 1970 SL 12"
description: "We are given 100 points in the plane, no three of which are"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1970
type: "shortlist"
number: 12
origin: "USS"
weight: 197000012
draft: false
---

# IMO 1970 SL 12

**Origin:** USS

## Problem

We are given 100 points in the plane, no three of which are
on the same line. Consider all triangles that have all vertices chosen from
the 100 given points. Prove that at most 70% of these triangles are acute
angled.

## Solution

Lemma.
Five points are given in the plane such that no three of them
are collinear. Then there are at least three triangles with vertices at
these points that are not acute-angled.
Proof. We consider three cases, according to whether the convex hull of
these points is a triangle, quadrilateral, or pentagon.
(i) Let a triangle ABC be the convex hull and two other points D and
E lie inside the triangle. At least two of the triangles ADB, BDC
and CDA have obtuse angles at the point D. Similarly, at least
two of the triangles AEB, BEC and CEA are obtuse-angled. Thus
there are at least four non-acute-angled triangles.
(ii) Suppose that ABCD is the convex hull and that E is a point of
its interior. At least one angle of the quadrilateral is not acute,
determining one non-acute-angled triangle. Also, the point E lies
in the interior of either \triangleABC or \triangleCDA hence, as in the previous
case, it determines another two obtuse-angled triangles.
(iii) It is easy to see that at least two of the angles of the pentagon are
not acute. We may assume that these two angles are among the
angles corresponding to vertices A, B, and C. Now consider the
quadrilateral ACDE. At least one its angles is not acute. Hence,
there are at least three triangles that are not acute-angled.

Now we consider all combinations of 5 points chosen from the given 100.
There are
100

such combinations, and for each of them there are at least
three non-acute-angled triangles with vertices in it. On the other hand,
vertices of each of the triangles are counted
97

times. Hence there are at
least 3
100

/
97

non-acute-angled triangles with vertices in the given 100
points. Since the number of all triangles with vertices in the given points
is
100

, the ratio between the number of acute-angled triangles and the
number of all triangles cannot be greater than
1 −
100

97
100
 = 0.7.
