---
title: "IMO 1970 SL 3"
description: "In the tetrahedron SABC the angle BSC is a right angle,"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1970
type: "shortlist"
number: 3
origin: "BUL"
weight: 197000003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1970 SL 3

**Origin:** BUL

## Problem

In the tetrahedron SABC the angle BSC is a right angle,
and the projection of the vertex S to the plane ABC is the intersection
of the altitudes of the triangle ABC. Let z be the radius of the inscribed
circle of the triangle ABC. Prove that
SA2 + SB2 + SC2 \geq18z2.

## Solution

We shall use the following lemma
Lemma. If an altitude of a tetrahedron passes through the orthocenter of
the opposite side, then each of the other altitudes possesses the same
property.
Proof.
Denote the tetrahedron by SABC and let a = BC, b = CA,
c = AB, m = SA, n = SB, p = SC. It is enough to prove that
an altitude passes through the orthocenter of the opposite side if and
only if a2 + m2 = b2 + n2 = c2 + p2.
Suppose that the foot S′ of the altitude from S is the orthocenter of
ABC. Then SS′ \perpABC ⇒SB2 −SC2 = S′B2 −S′C2. But from
AS′ \perpBC it follows that AB2 −AC2 = S′B2 −S′C2. From these two
equalities it can be concluded that n2 −p2 = c2 −b2, or equivalently,
n2 + b2 = c2 + p2. Analogously, a2 + m2 = n2 + b2, so we have proved
the ﬁrst part of the equivalence.
Now suppose that a2 + m2 = b2 + n2 = c2 + p2. Deﬁning S′ as before,
we get n2 −p2 = S′B2 −S′C2. From the condition n2 −p2 = c2 −b2
(⇔b2 + n2 = c2 + p2) we conclude that AS′ \perpBC. In the same way
CS′ \perpAB, which proves that S′ is the orthocenter of \triangleABC. The
lemma is thus proven.
Now using the lemma it is easy to see that if one of the angles at S is
right, than so are the others. Indeed, suppose that \angleASB = \pi/2. From the
lemma we have that the altitude from C passes through the orthocenter
of \triangleASB, which is S, so CS \perpASB and \angleCSA = \angleCSB = \pi/2.
Therefore m2 + n2 = c2, n2 + p2 = a2, and p2 + m2 = b2, so it follows
that m2 + n2 + p2 = (a2 + b2 + c2)/2. By the inequality between the
arithmetic and quadric means, we have that (a2 + b2 + c2)/2 \geq2s2/3,
where s denotes the semiperimeter of \triangleABC. It remains to be shown
that 2s2/3 \geq18r2. Since S\triangleABC = sr, this is equivalent to 2s4/3 \geq
18S2
ABC = 18s(s −a)(s −b)(s −c) by Heron’s formula. This reduces to
s3 \geq27(s−a)(s−b)(s−c), which is an obvious consequence of the AM–GM
mean inequality.
Remark.
In the place of the lemma one could prove that the opposite
edges of the tetrahedron are mutually perpendicular and proceed in the
same way.
