---
title: "IMO 1970 SL 5"
description: "Let M be an interior point of the tetrahedron ABCD. Prove"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1970
type: "shortlist"
number: 5
origin: "CZS"
weight: 197000005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1970 SL 5

**Origin:** CZS

## Problem

Let M be an interior point of the tetrahedron ABCD. Prove
that
−−\to
MA vol(MBCD) + −−\to
MB vol(MACD)
+−−\to
MC vol(MABD) + −−\to
MD vol(MABC) = 0
(vol(PQRS) denotes the volume of the tetrahedron PQRS).

## Solution

Denote respectively by A1, B1, C1 and D1 the points of intersection of the
lines AM, BM, CM, and DM with the opposite sides of the tetrahe-
dron. Since vol(MBCD) = vol(ABCD)−−−\to
MA1/−−\to
AA1, the relation we have
to prove is equivalent to
−−\to
MA \cdot
−−−\to
MA1
−−\to
AA1
+ −−\to
MB \cdot
−−−\to
MB1
−−\to
BB1
+ −−\to
MC \cdot
−−−\to
MC1
−−\to
CC1
+ −−\to
MD \cdot
−−−\to
MD1
−−−\to
DD1
= 0.
(1)
There exist unique real numbers \alpha, \beta, \gamma, and \delta such that \alpha+\beta +\gamma +\delta = 1
and for every point O in space
−−\to
OM = \alpha−\to
OA + \beta−−\to
OB + \gamma−−\to
OC + \delta−−\to
OD.
(2)
(This follows easily from −−\to
OM = −\to
OA+−−\to
AM = −\to
OA+k−−\to
AB +l−\to
AC +m−−\to
AD =
−−\to
AB + k(−−\to
OB −−\to
OA) + l(−−\to
OC −−\to
OA) + m(−−\to
OD −−\to
OA) for some k, l, m \inR.)
Further, from the condition that A1 belongs to the plane BCD we obtain
for every O in space the following equality for some \beta′, \gamma′, \delta′:
−−\to
OA1 = \beta′−−\to
OB + \gamma′−−\to
OC + \delta′−−\to
OD.
(3)
However, for \lambda = −−−\to
MA1/−−\to
AA1, −−\to
OM = \lambda−\to
OA+(1−\lambda)−−\to
OA1; hence substituting
(2) and (3) in this expression and equating coeﬃcients for −\to
OA we obtain
\lambda = −−−\to
MA1/−−\to
AA1 = \alpha. Analogously, \beta = −−−\to
MB1/−−\to
BB1, \gamma = −−−\to
MC1/−−\to
CC1, and
\delta = −−−\to
MD1/−−−\to
DD1; hence (1) follows immediately for O = M.
Remark.
The statement of the problem actually follows from the fact
that M is the center of mass of the system with masses vol(MBCD),
vol(MACD), vol(MABD), vol(MABC) at A, B, C, D respectively. Our
proof is actually a formal veriﬁcation of this fact.
