---
title: "IMO 1993 SL 13"
description: "Let S be the set of all pairs (m, n) of relatively prime positive"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1993
type: "shortlist"
number: 13
origin: "IRE"
weight: 199300013
draft: false
---

# IMO 1993 SL 13

**Origin:** IRE

## Problem

Let S be the set of all pairs (m, n) of relatively prime positive
integers m, n with n even and m < n. For s = (m, n) \inS write n = 2kn0,
where k, n0 are positive integers with n0 odd and deﬁne f(s) = (n0, m +
n −n0).
Prove that f is a function from S to S and that for each s = (m, n) \inS,
there exists a positive integer t \leqm+n+1
such that f t(s) = s, where
f t(s) = (f ◦f ◦\cdot \cdot \cdot ◦f)



t times
(s).
If m+n is a prime number that does not divide 2k−1 for k = 1, 2, . . ., m+
n−2, prove that the smallest value of t that satisﬁes the above conditions
is
/ m+n+1
, where [x] denotes the greatest integer less than or equal to
x.

## Solution

For an odd integer N > 1, let SN = {(m, n) \inS | m + n = N}. If
f(m, n) = (m1, n1), then m1 + n1 = m + n with m1 odd and m1 \leqn
2 <
N
2 < n1, so f maps SN to SN. Also f is bijective, since if f(m, n) =
(m1, n1), then n is uniquely determined as the even number of the form
2km1 that belongs to the interval [ N+1
2 , N], and this also determines m.
Note that SN has at most
/ N+1
elements, with equality if and only if
N is prime. Thus if (m, n) \inSN, there exist s, r with 1 \leqs < r \leq
/ N+5
such that f s(m, n) = f r(m, n). Consequently f t(m, n) = (m, n), where
t = r −s, 0 < t \leq
/ N+1
=
/ m+n+1
.
Suppose that (m, n) \inSN and t is the least positive integer with
f t(m, n) = (m, n). We write (m, n) = (m0, n0) and f i(m, n) = (mi, ni) for
i = 1, . . . , t. Then there exist positive integers ai such that 2aimi = ni−1,
i = 1, . . . , t. Since mt = m0, multiplying these equalities gives
2a1+a2+\cdot\cdot\cdot+atm0m1 \cdot \cdot \cdot mt−1 = n0n1 \cdot \cdot \cdot nt−1
\equiv(−1)tm0m1 \cdot \cdot \cdot mt−1 (mod N).
(1)

It follows that N | 2k \pm 1 and consequently N | 22k −1, where k =
a1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + at. On the other hand, it also follows that 2k | n0n1 \cdot \cdot \cdot nt−1 |
(N −1)(N −3) \cdot \cdot \cdot (N −2[N/4]). But since
(N −1)(N −3) \cdot \cdot \cdot

N −2
/ N
0
1 \cdot 3 \cdot \cdot \cdot

/ N−2
+ 1

= 2 \cdot 4 \cdot \cdot \cdot (N −1)
1 \cdot 2 \cdot \cdot \cdot N−1
= 2
N−1
2 ,
we conclude that 0 < k \leq
N−1
2 , where equality holds if and only if
{n1, . . . , nt} is the set of all even integers from N+1
to N −1, and conse-
quently t = N+1
4 .
Now if N ∤2h −1 for 1 \leqh < N −1, we must have 2k = N −1. Therefore
t = N+1
4 .
