---
title: "IMO 1993 SL 17"
description: "Let n be an integer greater than 1. In a circular arrange-"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1993
type: "shortlist"
number: 17
origin: "NET"
weight: 199300017
draft: false
---

# IMO 1993 SL 17

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

Let n be an integer greater than 1. In a circular arrange-
ment of n lamps L0, . . . , Ln−1, each one of that can be either ON or OFF,
we start with the situation where all lamps are ON, and then carry out
a sequence of steps, Step0,Step1,. . . . If Lj−1 (j is taken mod n) is ON,
then Stepj changes the status of Lj (it goes from ON to OFF or from
OFF to ON) but does not change the status of any of the other lamps. If
Lj−1 is OFF, then Stepj does not change anything at all. Show that:
(a) There is a positive integer M(n) such that after M(n) steps all lamps
are ON again.
(b) If n has the form 2k, then all lamps are ON after n2 −1 steps.
(c) If n has the form 2k + 1, then all lamps are ON after n2 −n + 1 steps.

## Solution

We introduce the rotation operation Rot to the left by one, so that Stepj =
Rot−j ◦Step0 ◦Rotj. Now writing Step∗= Rot ◦Step0, the problem is
transformed into the question whether there is an M(n) such that all
lamps are ON again after M(n) successive applications of Step∗.
We operate in the ﬁeld Z2, representing OFF by 0 and ON by 1. So if
the status of Lj at some moment is given by vj \inZ2, the eﬀect of Stepj is
that vj is replaced by vj +vj−1. With the n-tuple v0, . . . , vn−1 we associate
the polynomial
P(x) = vn−1xn−1 + v0xn−2 + v1xn−3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + vn−2.
By means of Step∗, this polynomial is transformed into the polynomial
Q(x) over Z of degree less than n that satisﬁes Q(x) \equivxP(x) (mod
xn + xn−1 + 1). From now on, the sign \equivalways stands for congruence
with this modulus.
(i) It suﬃces to show the existence of M(n) with xM(n) \equiv1. Because
the number of residue classes is ﬁnite, there are r, q, r < q such that
xq \equivxr, i.e., xr(xq−r −1) = 0. One can take M(n) = q −r. (Or
simply note that there are only ﬁnitely many possible conﬁgurations;

since each operation is bijective, the conﬁguration that reappears ﬁrst
must be ON, ON, . . . , ON.)
(ii) We shall prove that if n = 2k, then xn2−1 \equiv1. We have xn2 \equiv
(xn−1 + 1)n \equivxn2−n + 1, because all binomial coeﬃcients of order
n = 2k are even, apart from the ﬁrst one and the last one. Since also
xn2 \equivxn2−1 + xn2−n, this is what we wanted.
(iii) Now if n = 2k + 1, we prove that xn2−n+1 \equiv1. We have xn2−1 \equiv
(xn+1)n−1 \equiv(x + xn)n−1 \equivxn−1 + xn2−n (again by evenness of
binomial coeﬃcients of order n−1 = 2k). Together with xn2 \equivxn2−1+
xn2−n, this leads to xn2 \equivxn−1.
