---
title: "IMO 1993 SL 21"
description: "A circle S is said to cut a circle \Sigma diametrally if their common"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1993
type: "shortlist"
number: 21
origin: "GBR"
weight: 199300021
draft: false
---

# IMO 1993 SL 21

**Origin:** GBR

## Problem

A circle S is said to cut a circle \Sigma diametrally if their common
chord is a diameter of \Sigma.
Let SA, SB, SC be three circles with distinct centers A, B, C respectively.
Prove that A, B, C are collinear if and only if there is no unique circle S
that cuts each of SA, SB, SC diametrally. Prove further that if there exists
more than one circle S that cuts each of SA, SB, SC diametrally, then all
such circles pass through two ﬁxed points. Locate these points in relation
to the circles SA, SB, SC.

## Solution

Assume that S is a circle with center O that cuts Si diametrically in points
Pi, Qi, i \in{A, B, C}, and denote by ri, r the radii of Si and S respectively.
Since OA is perpendicular to PAQA, it follows by Pythagoras’s theorem
that OA2 +AP 2
A = OP 2
A, i.e., r2
A +OA2 = r2. Analogously r2
B +OB2 = r2
and r2
C + OC2 = r2. Thus if OA, OB, OC are the feet of perpendiculars
from O to BC, CA, AB respectively, then OCA2 −OCB2 = r2
B −r2
A. Since
the left-hand side is a monotonic function of OC \inAB, the point OC is
uniquely determined by the imposed conditions. The same holds for OA
and OB.
If A, B, C are not collinear, then the
positions of OA, OB, OC uniquely
determine the point O, and there-
fore the circle S also. On the other
hand, if A, B, C are collinear, all one
can deduce is that O lies on the lines
lA, lB, lC through OA, OB, OC, per-
pendicular to BC, CA, AB respec-
tively. By this, lA, lB, lC are paral-
lel, so O can be either anywhere on
the line if these lines coincide, or
A
B
C
O
OA
OB
OC
SA
SB
SC
lA
lB
lC
S
nowhere if they don’t coincide. So if there exists more than one circle S,
A, B, C lie on a line and the foot O′ of the perpendicular from O to the
line ABC is ﬁxed. If X, Y are the intersection points of S and the line
ABC, then r2 = OX2 = OA2 + r2
A and consequently O′X2 = O′A2 + r2
A,
which implies that X, Y are ﬁxed.
