---
title: "IMO 1993 SL 22"
description: "A, B, C, D are four points in the plane, with C, D on the"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1993
type: "shortlist"
number: 22
origin: "GBR"
weight: 199300022
draft: false
---

# IMO 1993 SL 22

**Origin:** GBR

## Problem

A, B, C, D are four points in the plane, with C, D on the
same side of the line AB, such that AC \cdot BD = AD \cdot BC and ∡ADB =
90◦+ ∡ACB. Find the ratio
AB \cdot CD
AC \cdot BD,
and prove that circles ACD, BCD are orthogonal. (Intersecting circles
are said to be orthogonal if at either common point their tangents are
perpendicular.)

## Solution

Let M be the point inside \angleADB that satisﬁes DM = DB and DM \perp

DB. Then \angleADM = \angleACB and
AD/DM
=
AC/CB. It follows
that the triangles ADM, ACB are
similar; hence \angleCAD = \angleBAM
(because \angleCAB = \angleDAM) and
AB/AM = AC/AD. Consequently
the triangles CAD, BAM are sim-
ilar and therefore
AC
AB
=
CD
BM
=
CD
\sqrt
2BD. Hence AB\cdotCD
AC\cdotBD =
\sqrt
2.
A
B
C
D
M
T
U
Let CT, CU be the tangents at C to the circles ACD, BCD respectively.
Then (in oriented angles) \angleTCU = \angleTCD+\angleDCU = \angleCAD+\angleCBD =
90◦, as required.
Second solution to the ﬁrst part. Denote by E, F, G the feet of the per-
pendiculars from D to BC, CA, AB. Consider the pedal triangle EFG.
Since FG = AD sin \angleA, from the sine theorem we have FG : GE : EF =
(CD \cdot AB) : (BD \cdot AC) : (AD \cdot BC). Thus EG = FG. On the other
hand, \angleEGF = \angleEGD + \angleDGF = \angleCBD + \angleCAD = 90◦implies that
EF : EG =
\sqrt
2 : 1; hence the required ratio is
\sqrt
2.
Third solution to the ﬁrst part. Under inversion centered at C and with
power r2 = CA\cdotCB, the triangle DAB maps into a right-angled isosceles
triangle D∗A∗B∗, where
D∗A∗= AD \cdot BC
CD
, D∗B∗= AC \cdot BD
CD
, A∗B∗= AB \cdot CD
CD
.
Thus D∗B∗: A∗B∗=
\sqrt
2, and this is the required ratio.
