---
title: "IMO 1993 SL 4"
description: "In the triangle ABC, let D, E be points on the side BC such"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1993
type: "shortlist"
number: 4
origin: "SPA"
weight: 199300004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1993 SL 4

**Origin:** SPA

## Problem

In the triangle ABC, let D, E be points on the side BC such
that \angleBAD = \angleCAE. If M, N are, respectively, the points of tangency
with BC of the incircles of the triangles ABD and ACE, show that
MB +
MD =
NC +
NE .

## Solution

We note that p does not exceed
one half of the circumradius of \triangleA′B′C′. However, by the theorem on
the nine-point circle, this circumradius is equal to 1
2R, and the conclusion
follows.
Second solution. By a well-known relation we have cos A+cos B+cos C =
1+ r
R (= 1+r when R = 1). Next, recalling that the incenter of \triangleA′B′C′
is at the orthocenter of \triangleABC, we easily obtain p = 2 cosA cos B cos C.
Cosines of angles of a triangle satisfy the identity cos2 A+cos2 B+cos2 C+
2 cos A cos B cos C = 1 (the proof is straightforward: see (SL81-11)). Thus
p + 1
3(1 + r)2 = 2 cos A cos B cos C + 1
3(cos A + cos B + cos C)2
\leq2 cos A cos B cos C + cos2 A + cos2 B + cos2 C = 1.
3. Let O1 and \rho be the center and radius of kc. It is clear that C, I, O1 are
collinear and CI/CO1 = r/\rho. By Stewart’s theorem applied to \triangleOCO1,
OI2 = r
\rhoOO2
1 +

1 −r
\rho

OC2 −CI \cdot IO1.
(1)
Since OO1 = R −\rho, OC = R and by Euler’s formula OI2 = R2 −2Rr,
substituting these values in (1) gives CI \cdot IO1 = r\rho, or equivalently CO1 \cdot
IO1 = \rho2 = DO2
1. Hence the triangles CO1D and DO1I are similar,
implying \angleDIO1 = 90◦. Since CD = CE and the line CO1 bisects the
segment DE, it follows that I is the midpoint of DE.
Second solution. Under the inversion with center C and power ab, kc is
transformed into the excircle of <A <BC corresponding to C. Thus CD =

ab
s , where s is the common semiperimeter of \triangleABC and \triangle<A <BC, and
consequently the distance from D to BC is ab
s sin C = 2SABC
s
= 2r. The
statement follows immediately.
Third solution.
We shall prove a stronger statement: Let ABCD be a
convex quadrilateral inscribed in a circle k, and k′ the circle that is tangent
to segments BO, AO at K, L respectively (where O = BD \capAC), and
internally to k at M. Then KL contains the incenters I, J of \triangleABC and
\triangleABD.
Let K′, K′′, L′, L′′, N denote the midpoints of arcs BC, BD, AC, AD, AB
that don’t contain M; X′, X′′ the points on k deﬁned by X′N = NX′′ =
K′K′′ = L′L′′ (as oriented arcs); and set S = AK′ \capBL′′, M = NS \capk,
K = K′′M \capBO, L = L′M \capAO.
It is clear that I = AK′ \capBL′, J = AK′′ \capBL′′. Furthermore, X′M
contains I (to see this, use the fact that for A, B, C, D, E, F on k, lines
AD, BE, CF are concurrent if and only if AB \cdotCD \cdotEF = BC \cdotDE \cdotFA,
and then express AM/MB by applying this rule to AMBK′NL′′ and
show that AK′, MX′, BL′ are concurrent).
Analogously, X′′M contains J. Now
the points B, K, I, S, M lie on a cir-
cle (\angleBKM = \angleBIM = \angleBSM),
and points A, L, J, S, M do so as
well. Lines IK, JL are parallel to
K′′L′ (because \angleMKI = \angleMBI =
\angleMK′′L′). On the other hand,
the quadrilateral ABIJ is cyclic,
and simple calculation with an-
gles shows that IJ is also paral-
lel to K′′L′. Hence K, I, J, L are
collinear.
A
B
C
D
O
K′
K′′
L′
L′′
X′′
X′
S
I
J
K
L
M
N
Finally, K \equivK, L \equivL, and M \equivM because the homothety centered at
M that maps k′ to k sends K to K′′ and L to L′ (thus M, K, K′′, as well
as M, L, L′, must be collinear). As is seen now, the deciphered picture
yields many other interesting properties. Thus, for example, N, S, M are
collinear, i.e., \angleAMS = \angleBMS.
Fourth solution. We give an alternative proof of the more general state-
ment in the third solution. Let W be the foot of the perpendicular from
B to AC. We deﬁne q = CW, h = BW, t = OL = OK, x = AL,
\theta = ∡WBO (\theta is negative if B(O, W, A), \theta = 0 if W = O), and as usual,
a = BC, b = AC, c = AB. Let \alpha = ∡KLC and \beta = ∡ILC (both angles
must be acute). Our goal is to prove \alpha = \beta. We note that 90◦−\theta = 2\alpha.
One easily gets
tan \alpha =
cos \theta
1 + sin \theta ,
tan \beta =
2SABC
a+b+c
b+c−a
−x .
(1)

Applying Casey’s theorem to A, B, C, k′, we get AC \cdot BK + AL \cdot BC =
AB \cdotCL, i.e., b

h
cos \theta −t

+xa = c(b−x). Using that t = b−x−q−h tan\theta
we get
x = b(b + c −q) −bh

cos \theta + tan \theta

a + b + c
.
(2)
Plugging (2) into the second equation of (1) and using bh = 2SABC and
c2 = b2 + a2 −2bq, we obtain tan \alpha = tan \beta, i.e., \alpha = \beta, which completes
our proof.
4. Let h be the altitude from A and ϕ = \angleBAD. We have BM = 1
2(BD +
AB −AD) and MD = 1
2(BD −AB + AD), so
MB +
MD =
BD
MB \cdot MD =
4BD
BD2 −AB2 −AD2 + 2AB \cdot AD
=
4BD
2AB \cdot AD(1 −cos ϕ) =
2BD sin ϕ
2SABD(1 −cos ϕ)
=
2BD sin ϕ
BD \cdot h(1 −cos ϕ) =
h tan ϕ
.
It follows that
MB +
MD depends only on h and ϕ. Specially,
NC +
NE =
h tan(ϕ/2) as well.
