---
title: "IMO 1993 SL 5"
description: "On an inﬁnite chessboard, a solitaire game is played as"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1993
type: "shortlist"
number: 5
origin: "FIN"
weight: 199300005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1993 SL 5

**Origin:** FIN

## Problem

On an inﬁnite chessboard, a solitaire game is played as
follows: At the start, we have n2 pieces occupying n2 squares that form a
square of side n. The only allowed move is a jump horizontally or vertically
over an occupied square to an unoccupied one, and the piece that has been
jumped over is removed. For what positive integers n can the game end
with only one piece remaining on the board?

## Solution

For n = 1 the game is trivially over. If n = 2, it can end, for example, in
the following way:
•
•
•
•
−\to
•
•
−\to
•
Fig. 1
The sequence of moves shown in Fig. 2 enables us to remove three pieces
placed in a 1 \times 3 rectangle, using one more piece and one more free cell.
In that way, for any n \geq4 we can reduce an (n + 3) \times (n + 3) square to
an n \times n square (Fig. 3). Therefore the game can end for every n that is
not divisible by 3.
• •
•
•
−\to
•
•
•
−\to
• •
−\to
•
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Suppose now that one can play the game on a 3k\times3k square so that at the
end only one piece remains. Denote the cells by (i, j), i, j \in{1, . . . , 3k},
and let S0, S1, S2 denote the numbers of pieces on those squares (i, j) for

which i+j gives remainder 0, 1, 2 respectively upon division by 3. Initially
S0 = S1 = S2 = 3k2. After each move, two of S0, S1, S2 diminish and one
increases by one. Thus each move reverses the parity of the Si’s, so that
S0, S1, S2 are always of the same parity. But in the ﬁnal position one of the
Si’s must be equal to 1 and the other two must be 0, which is impossible.
