---
title: "IMO 1993 SL 9"
description: "(a) Show that the set Q+ of all positive rational numbers can be par-"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1993
type: "shortlist"
number: 9
origin: "IND"
weight: 199300009
draft: false
---

# IMO 1993 SL 9

**Origin:** IND

## Problem

(a) Show that the set Q+ of all positive rational numbers can be par-
titioned into three disjoint subsets A, B, C satisfying the following
conditions:
BA = B,
B2 = C,
BC = A,
where HK stands for the set {hk | h \inH, k \inK} for any two subsets
H, K of Q+ and H2 stands for HH.
(b) Show that all positive rational cubes are in A for such a partition of
Q+.
(c) Find such a partition Q+ = A \cupB \cupC with the property that for no
positive integer n \leq34 are both n and n + 1 in A; that is,
min{n \inN | n \inA, n + 1 \inA} > 34.

## Solution

We shall ﬁrst complete the “multiplication table” for the sets A, B, C. It
is clear that this multiplication is commutative and associative, so that
we have the following relations:
AC = (AB)B = BB = C;
A2 = AA = (AB)C = BC = A;
C2 = CC = B(BC) = BA = B.
(a) Now put 1 in A and distribute the primes arbitrarily in A, B, C. This
distribution uniquely determines the partition of Q+ with the stated
property. Indeed, if an arbitrary rational number
x = p\alpha1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot p\alphak
k q\beta1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot q\betal
l r\gamma1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot r\gammam
m
is given, where pi \inA, qi \inB, ri \inC are primes, it is easy to see that
x belongs to A, B, or C according as \beta1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + \betal + 2\gamma1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + 2\gammam
is congruent to 0, 1, or 2 (mod 3).
(b) In every such partition, cubes all belong to A. In fact, A3 = A2A =
AA = A, B3 = B2B = CB = A, C3 = C2C = BC = A.
(c) By (b) we have 1, 8, 27 \inA. Then 2 ̸\inA, and since the problem is
symmetric with respect to B, C, we can assume 2 \inB and conse-
quently 4 \inC. Also 7 ̸\inA, and also 7 ̸\inB (otherwise, 28 = 4 \cdot 7 \inA
and 27 \inA), so 7 \inC, 14 \inA, 28 \inB. Further, we see that 3 ̸\inA
(since otherwise 9 \inA and 8 \inA). Put 3 in C. Then 5 ̸\inB (otherwise
15 \inA and 14 \inA), so let 5 \inC too. Consequently 6, 10 \inA. Also
13 ̸\inA, and 13 ̸\inC because 26 ̸\inA, so 13 \inB. Now it is easy to
distribute the remaining primes 11, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31: one possibility is
A = {1, 6, 8, 10, 14, 19, 23, 27, 29, 31, 33, . . .},
C = {3, 4, 5, 7, 18, 22, 24, 26, 30, 32, 34, . . .},
B = {2, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 25, 28, 35, . . .}.
Remark. It can be proved that min{n \inN | n \inA, n + 1 \inA} \leq77.
