---
title: "IMO 1975 SL 8"
description: "On the sides of an arbitrary triangle ABC, triangles BPC,"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1975
type: "shortlist"
number: 8
origin: "NET"
weight: 197500008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1975 SL 8

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

On the sides of an arbitrary triangle ABC, triangles BPC,
CQA, and ARB are externally erected such that
∡PBC = ∡CAQ = 45◦,
∡BCP = ∡QCA = 30◦,
∡ABR = ∡BAR = 15◦.
Prove that ∡QRP = 90◦and QR = RP.

## Solution

Let K and L be the feet of perpendiculars from P and Q to BC and AC
respectively.

Let M, N be points on AB (or-
dered A −N −M −B) such that
RMN is a right isosceles triangle
with \angleR = 90◦. By sine theorem
we have BM
BA = BM
BR \cdot BR
BA = sin 15◦
sin 45◦.
Since BK
BC = sin 45◦sin 30◦
cos 15◦
= sin 15◦
sin 45◦,
we deduce that MK \parallelAC and
MK = AL. Similarly, NL \parallelBC
A
B
C
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
and NL = BK. It follows that the vectors −−\to
RN, −−\to
NL, −\to
LQ are the images
of −−\to
RM, −−\to
KP, −−\to
MK respectively under a rotation of 90◦, and consequently
the same holds for their sums −−\to
RQ and −\to
RP. Therefore, QR = RP and
\angleQRP = 90◦.
Second solution. Let ABS be the equilateral triangle constructed in the
exterior of \triangleABC. Obviously, the triangles BPC, BRS, ARS, AQC are
similar. Let f be the rotational homothety centered at B that maps P
onto C, and let g be the rotational homothety about A that maps C onto
Q. The composition h = g ◦f is also a rotational homothety; its angle is
\anglePBC +\angleCAQ = 90◦, and the coeﬃcient is BC
BP \cdot AQ
AC = 1. Moreover, R is
a ﬁxed point of h because f(R) = S and g(S) = R. Hence R is the center
of h, and the statement follows from h(P) = Q.
Remark.
There are two more possible approaches: One includes using
complex numbers and the other one is mere calculating of RP, RQ, PQ
by the cosine theorem.
Second remark. The problem allows a generalization: Given that \angleCBP =
\angleCAQ = \alpha, \angleBCP = \angleACQ = \beta, and \angleRAB = \angleRBA = 90◦−\alpha −\beta,
show that RP = RQ and \anglePRQ = 2\alpha.
