---
title: "IMO 1971 SL 7"
description: "Given a tetrahedron ABCD whose all faces are acute-"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1971
type: "shortlist"
number: 7
origin: "NET"
weight: 197100007
draft: false
---

# IMO 1971 SL 7

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

Given a tetrahedron ABCD whose all faces are acute-
angled triangles, set
\sigma = ∡DAB + ∡BCD −∡ABC −∡CDA.
Consider all closed broken lines XY ZTX whose vertices X, Y, Z, T lie in
the interior of segments AB, BC, CD, DA respectively. Prove that:
(a) if \sigma ̸= 0, then there is no broken line XY ZT of minimal length;
(b) if \sigma = 0, then there are inﬁnitely many such broken lines of minimal
length. That length equals 2AC sin(\alpha/2), where
\alpha = ∡BAC + ∡CAD + ∡DAB.

## Solution

(a) Suppose that X, Y, Z are ﬁxed on segments AB, BC, CD. It is proven
in a standard way that if \angleATX ̸= \angleZTD, then ZT + TX can be re-
duced. It follows that if there exists a broken line XY ZTX of minimal
length, then the following conditions hold:
\angleDAB = \pi −\angleATX −\angleAXT,
\angleABC = \pi −\angleBXY −\angleBY X = \pi −\angleAXT −\angleCY Z,
\angleBCD = \pi −\angleCY Z −\angleCZY,
\angleCDA = \pi −\angleDTZ −\angleDZT = \pi −\angleATX −\angleCZY.
Thus \sigma = 0.
(b) Now let \sigma = 0. Let us cut the surface of the tetrahedron along
the edges AC, CD, and DB and set it down into a plane. Con-
sider the plane ﬁgure S = ACD′BD′′C′ thus obtained made up of
triangles BCD′, ABC, ABD′′, and AC′D′′, with Z′, T ′, Z′′ respec-
tively on CD′, AD′′, C′D′′ (here C′ corresponds to C, etc.). Since

\angleC′D′′A + \angleD′′AB + \angleABC + \angleBCD′ = 0 as an oriented angle
(because \sigma = 0), the lines CD′ and C′D′′ are parallel and equally
oriented; i.e., CD′D′′C′ is a parallelogram.
The broken line XY ZTX has minimal length if and only if Z′′, T ′, X,
Y, Z′ are collinear (where Z′Z′′ \parallel
CC′), and then this length equals
Z′Z′′ = CC′ = 2AC sin(\alpha/2).
There is an inﬁnity of such lines,
one for every line Z′Z′′ parallel to
CC′ that meets the interiors of all
the segments CB, BA, AD′′. Such
\alpha
D′
C
C′
D′′
A
B
Z′′
Z′
Y
X
T ′
Z′Z′′ exist. Indeed, the triangles CAB and D′′AB are acute-angled,
and thus the segment AB has a common interior point with the par-
allelogram CD′D′′C′. Therefore the desired result follows.
