---
title: "IMO 1994 SL C2"
description: "In a certain city, age is reckoned in terms of real numbers"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1994
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 2
origin: "COL"
weight: 199402002
draft: false
---

# IMO 1994 SL C2

**Origin:** COL  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

In a certain city, age is reckoned in terms of real numbers
rather than integers. Every two citizens x and x′ either know each other
or do not know each other. Moreover, if they do not, then there exists a
chain of citizens x = x0, x1, . . . , xn = x′ for some integer n \geq2 such that
xi−1 and xi know each other. In a census, all male citizens declare their
ages, and there is at least one male citizen. Each female citizen provides
only the information that her age is the average of the ages of all the
citizens she knows. Prove that this is enough to determine uniquely the
ages of all the female citizens.

## Solution

Let a1, a2, . . . , am be the ages of the male citizens (m \geq1). We claim that
the age of each female citizen can be expressed in the form c1a1+\cdot \cdot \cdot+cmam
for some constants ci \geq0, and we will prove this by induction on the
number n of female citizens.
The claim is clear if n = 1. Suppose it holds for n and consider the case
of n + 1 female citizens. Choose any of them, say A of age x who knows k

citizens (at least one male). By the induction hypothesis, the age of each
of the other n females is expressible as c1a1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + cmam + c0x, where
ci \geq0 and c0 + c1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + cm = 1. Consequently, the sum of ages of the k
citizens who know A is kx = b1a1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + bmam + b0x for some constants
bi \geq0 with sum k. But A knows at least one male citizen (who does not
contribute to the coeﬃcient of x), so b0 \leqk −1. Hence x = b1a1+\cdot\cdot\cdot+bmam
k−b0
,
and the claim follows.
