---
title: "IMO 1994 SL C4"
description: "There are n + 1 ﬁxed positions in a row, labeled 0 to n in"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1994
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 4
origin: "EST"
weight: 199402004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1994 SL C4

**Origin:** EST  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

There are n + 1 ﬁxed positions in a row, labeled 0 to n in
increasing order from right to left. Cards numbered 0 to n are shuﬄed and
dealt, one in each position. The object of the game is to have card i in
the ith position for 0 \leqi \leqn. If this has not been achieved, the following
move is executed. Determine the smallest k such that the kth position
is occupied by a card l > k. Remove this card, slide all cards from the
(k + 1)st to the lth position one place to the right, and replace the card l
in the lth position.
(a) Prove that the game lasts at most 2n −1 moves.
(b) Prove that there exists a unique initial conﬁguration for which the
game lasts exactly 2n −1 moves.

## Solution

(a) For i = 1, . . . , n, let di be 0 if the card i is in the ith position, and 1
otherwise. Deﬁne b = d1 + 2d2 + 22d3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + 2n−1dn, so that 0 \leqb \leq
2n −1, and b = 0 if and only if the game is over. After each move some
digit dl changes from 1 to 0 while dl+1, dl+2, . . . remain unchanged.
Hence b decreases after each move, and consequently the game ends
after at most 2n −1 moves.
(b) Suppose the game lasts exactly 2n −1 moves. Then each move de-
creases b for exactly one, so playing the game in reverse (starting
from the ﬁnal conﬁguration), every move is uniquely determined. It
follows that if the conﬁguration that allows a game lasting 2n −1
moves exists, it must be unique.
Consider the initial conﬁguration 0, n, n −1, . . . , 2, 1. We prove by
induction that the game will last exactly 2n −1 moves, and that the
card 0 will get to the 0th position only in the last move. This is trivial
for n = 1, so suppose that the claim is true for some n = m −1 \geq1
and consider the case n = m. Obviously the card 0 does not move until
the card m gets to the 0-th position. But if we ignore the card 0 and
consider the card m to be the card 0, the induction hypothesis gives
that the card m will move to the 0th position only after 2m−1 −1
moves. After these 2m−1 −1 moves, we come to the conﬁguration
0, m −1, . . . , 2, 1, m. The next move yields m, 0, m −1, . . . , 2, 1, so by
the induction hypothesis again we need 2m−1 −1 moves more to ﬁnish
the game.
