---
title: "IMO 1994 SL C5"
description: "At a round table are 1994 girls, playing a game with a deck"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1994
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 5
origin: "SWE"
weight: 199402005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1994 SL C5

**Origin:** SWE  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

At a round table are 1994 girls, playing a game with a deck
of n cards. Initially, one girl holds all the cards. In each turn, if at least
one girl holds at least two cards, one of these girls must pass a card to
each of her two neighbors. The game ends when and only when each girl
is holding at most one card.
(a) Prove that if n \geq1994, then the game cannot end.
(b) Prove that if n < 1994, then the game must end.

## Solution

(a) The case n > 1994 is trivial. Suppose that n = 1994. Label the girls
G1 to G1994, and let G1 initially hold all the cards. At any moment
give to each card the value i, i = 1, . . . , 1994, if Gi holds it. Deﬁne the
characteristic C of a position as the sum of all these values. Initially
C = 1994. In each move, if Gi passes cards to Gi−1 and Gi+1 (where
G0 = G1994 and G1995 = G1), C changes for \pm1994 or does not
change, so that it remains divisible by 1994. But if the game ends, the
characteristic of the ﬁnal position will be C = 1 + 2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + 1994 =
997 \cdot 1995, which is not divisible by 1994.
(b) Whenever a card is passed from one girl to another for the ﬁrst time,
let the girls sign their names on it. Thereafter, if one of them passes a
card to her neighbor, we shall assume that the passed card is exactly
the one signed by both of them. Thus each signed card is stuck between
two neighboring girls, so if n < 1994, there are two neighbors who
never exchange cards. Consequently, there is a girl G who played only
a ﬁnite number of times. If her neighbor plays inﬁnitely often, then
after her last move, G will continue to accumulate cards indeﬁnitely,
which is impossible. Hence every girl plays ﬁnitely many times.
