---
title: "IMO 1994 SL G3"
description: 'A circle \omega is tangent to two parallel lines l1 and l2. A second'
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1994
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 3
origin: "RUS"
weight: 199403003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1994 SL G3

**Origin:** RUS  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

A circle \omega is tangent to two parallel lines l1 and l2. A second
circle \omega1 is tangent to l1 at A and to \omega externally at C. A third circle \omega2
is tangent to l2 at B, to \omega externally at D, and to \omega1 externally at E. AD
intersects BC at Q. Prove that Q is the circumcenter of triangle CDE.
8 This problem is false. However, it is true if “not outside ABM” is replaced by
“not outside ABCD”.

## Solution

We shall prove that AD is a common tangent of \omega and \omega2. Denote by
K, L the points of tangency of \omega with l1 and l2 respectively. Let r, r1, r2
be the radii of \omega, \omega1, \omega2 respectively, and set KA = x, LB = y. It will
be enough if we show that xy = 2r2, since this will imply that \triangleKLB
and \triangleAKO are similar, where O is the center of \omega, and consequently that
OA \perpKD (because D \inKB). Now if O1 is the center of \omega1, we have x2 =
KA2 = OO2
1 −(KO−AO1)2 = (r+r1)2−(r−r1)2 = 4rr1 and analogously
y2 = 4rr2. But we also have (r1 +r2)2 = O1O2
2 = (x−y)2 +(2r−r1−r2)2,
so x2 −2xy + y2 = 4r(r1 + r2 −r), from which we obtain xy = 2r2 as
claimed. Hence AD is tangent to both \omega, \omega2, and similarly BC is tangent
to \omega, \omega1.
It follows that Q lies on the radical axes of pairs of circles (\omega, \omega1) and
(\omega, \omega2). Therefore Q also lies on the radical axis of (\omega1, \omega2), i.e., on the
common tangent at E of \omega1 and \omega2. Hence QC = QD = QE.
Second solution. An inversion with center at D maps \omega and \omega2 to parallel
lines, \omega1 and l2 to disjoint equal circles touching \omega, \omega2, and l1 to a circle
externally tangent to \omega1, l2, and to \omega. It is easy to see that the obtained
picture is symmetric (with respect to a diameter of l1), and that line AD
is parallel to the lines \omega and \omega2. Going back to the initial picture, this
means that AD is a common tangent of \omega and \omega2. The end is like that in
the ﬁrst solution.
