---
title: "IMO 1994 SL N4"
description: "For any positive integer x0, three sequences {xn}, {yn}, and"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1994
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 4
origin: "FRA"
weight: 199404004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1994 SL N4

**Origin:** FRA  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

For any positive integer x0, three sequences {xn}, {yn}, and
{zn} are de’¼üned as follows:
(i) y0 = 4 and z0 = 1;
(ii) if xn is even for n \geq0, xn+1 = xn
2 , yn+1 = 2yn, and zn+1 = zn;
(iii) if xn is odd for n \geq0, xn+1 = xn ŌłÆyn
2 ŌłÆzn, yn+1 = yn, and zn+1 =
yn + zn.
The integer x0 is said to be good if xn = 0 for some n \geq1. Find the
number of good integers less than or equal to 1994.

## Solution

Note ’¼ürst that yn = 2k (k \geq2) and zk \equiv1 (mod 4) for all n, so if xn is
odd, xn+1 will be even. Further, it is shown by induction on n that yn > zn
when xnŌłÆ1 is even and 2yn > zn > yn when xnŌłÆ1 is odd. In fact, n = 1 is
the trivial case, while if it holds for n \geq1, then yn+1 = 2yn > zn = zn+1
if xn is even, and 2yn+1 = 2yn > yn + zn = zn+1 if xn is odd (since then
xnŌłÆ1 is even).
If x1 = 0, then x0 = 3 is good. Suppose xn = 0 for some n \geq2.
Then xnŌłÆ1 is odd and xnŌłÆ2 is even, so that ynŌłÆ1 > znŌłÆ1. We claim
that a pair (ynŌłÆ1, znŌłÆ1), where 2k = ynŌłÆ1 > znŌłÆ1 > 0 and znŌłÆ1 \equiv1
(mod 4), uniquely determines x0 = f(ynŌłÆ1, znŌłÆ1). We see that xnŌłÆ1 =
2ynŌłÆ1 + znŌłÆ1, and de’¼üne (xk, yk, zk) backwards as follows, until we get
(yk, zk) = (4, 1). If yk > zk, then xkŌłÆ1 must have been even, so we de’¼üne
(xkŌłÆ1, ykŌłÆ1, zkŌłÆ1) = (2xk, yk/2, zk); otherwise xkŌłÆ1 must have been odd,
so we put (xkŌłÆ1, ykŌłÆ1, zkŌłÆ1) = (xk ŌłÆyk/2 + zk, yk, zk ŌłÆyk). We even-
tually arrive at (y0, z0) = (4, 1) and a good integer x0 = f(ynŌłÆ1, znŌłÆ1),
as claimed. Thus for example (ynŌłÆ1, znŌłÆ1) = (64, 61) implies xnŌłÆ1 = 93,
(xnŌłÆ2, ynŌłÆ2, znŌłÆ2) = (186, 32, 61) etc., and x0 = 1953, while in the case
of (ynŌłÆ1, znŌłÆ1) = (128, 1) we get x0 = 2080.
Note that yŌĆ▓ > y ŌćÆf(yŌĆ▓, zŌĆ▓) > f(y, z) and zŌĆ▓ > z ŌćÆf(y, zŌĆ▓) > f(y, z).
Therefore there are no y, z for which 1953 < f(y, z) < 2080. Hence all good
integers less than or equal to 1994 are given as f(y, z), y = 2k \leq64 and
0 < z \equiv1 (mod 4), and the number of such (y, z) equals 1+2+4+8+16 =
31. So the answer is 31.
