---
title: "IMO 1986 SL 11"
description: "Let f(n) be the least number of distinct points in the plane"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1986
type: "shortlist"
number: 11
origin: "BUL"
weight: 198600011
draft: false
---

# IMO 1986 SL 11

**Origin:** BUL

## Problem

Let f(n) be the least number of distinct points in the plane
such that for each k = 1, 2, . . ., n there exists a straight line containing
exactly k of these points. Find an explicit expression for f(n).
Simpliﬁed version. Show that f(n) =
/ n+1
0 / n+2
([x] denoting the great-
est integer not exceeding x).

## Solution

Let X be a ﬁnite set in the plane and lk a line containing exactly k points
of X (k = 1, . . . , n). Then ln contains n points, ln−1 contains at least n−2
points not lying on ln, ln−2 contains at least n −4 points not lying on ln
or ln−1, etc. It follows that
|X| \geqg(n) = n + (n −2) + (n −4) + \cdot \cdot \cdot +

n −2
/ n
0
.
Hence f(n) \geqg(n) =
/ n+1
0 / n+2
, where the last equality is easily proved
by induction.
We claim that f(n) = g(n). To prove this, we shall inductively construct
a set Xn of cardinality g(n) with the required property. For n \leq2 a
one-point and two-point set satisfy the requirements. Assume that Xn is
a set of g(n) points and that lk is a line containing exactly k points of
Xn, k = 1, . . . , n. Consider any line l not parallel to any of the lk’s and
not containing any point of Xn or any intersection point of the lk. Let l
intersect lk in a point Pk, k = 1, . . . , n, and let Pn+1, Pn+2 be two points
on l other than P1, . . . , Pn. We deﬁne Xn+2 = Xn \cup{P1, . . . , Pn+2}. The
set Xn+2 consists of g(n) + (n + 2) = g(n + 2) points. Since the lines
l, ln, . . . , l2, l1 meet Xn in n + 2, n + 1, . . . , 3, 2 points respectively (and
there clearly exists a line containing only one point of Xn+2), this set also
meets the demands.
