---
title: "IMO 1986 SL 17"
description: "Let A, B, C be ﬁxed points in the plane. A man starts"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1986
type: "shortlist"
number: 17
origin: "CHN"
weight: 198600017
draft: false
---

# IMO 1986 SL 17

**Origin:** CHN

## Problem

Let A, B, C be ﬁxed points in the plane. A man starts
from a certain point P0 and walks directly to A. At A he turns his di-
rection by 60◦to the left and walks to P1 such that P0A = AP1. Af-
ter he does the same action 1986 times successively around the points
A, B, C, A, B, C, . . . , he returns to the starting point. Prove that \triangleABC
is equilateral and that the vertices A, B, C are arranged counterclockwise.

## Solution

We use complex numbers to represent the position of a point in the plane.
For convenience, let A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, . . . be A, B, C, A, B, . . . respec-
tively, and let P0 be the origin. After the kth step, the position of Pk will
be Pk = Ak + (Pk−1 −Ak)u, k = 1, 2, 3, . . ., where u = e4\piı/3. We easily
obtain
Pk = (1 −u)(Ak + uAk−1 + u2Ak−2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + uk−1A1).
The condition P0 \equivP1986 is equivalent to A1986 +uA1985 +\cdot \cdot \cdot+u1984A2 +
u1985A1 = 0, which, having in mind that A1 = A4 = A7 = \cdot \cdot \cdot , A2 = A5 =
A8 = \cdot \cdot \cdot , A3 = A6 = A9 = \cdot \cdot \cdot , reduces to
662(A3 + uA2 + u2A1) = (1 + u3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + u1983)(A3 + uA2 + u2A1) = 0.
It follows that A3 −A1 = u(A1 −A2), and the assertion follows.
Second solution. Let fP denote the rotation with center P through 120◦
clockwise. Let f1 = fA. Then f1(P0) = P1. Let B′ = f1(B), C′ = f1(C),
and f2 = fB′. Then f2(P1) = P2 and f2(AB′C′) = A′B′C′′. Finally, let
f3 = fC′′ and f3(A′B′C′′) = A′′B′′C′′. Then g = f3f2f1 is a translation
sending P0 to P3 and C to C′′. Now P1986 = P0 implies that g662 is the
identity, and thus C = C′′.
Let K be such that ABK is equilateral and positively oriented. We observe
that f2f1(K) = K; therefore the rotation f2f1 satisﬁes f2f1(P) ̸= P for
P ̸= K. Hence f2f1(C) = C′′ = C implies K = C.
