---
title: "IMO 1986 SL 8"
description: "From a collection of n persons q distinct two-member teams"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1986
type: "shortlist"
number: 8
origin: "USA"
weight: 198600008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1986 SL 8

**Origin:** USA

## Problem

From a collection of n persons q distinct two-member teams
are selected and ranked 1, . . . , q (no ties). Let m be the least integer larger
than or equal to 2q/n. Show that there are m distinct teams that may
be listed so that (i) each pair of consecutive teams on the list have one
member in common and (ii) the chain of teams on the list are in rank
order.
Alternative formulation. Given a graph with n vertices and q edges num-
bered 1, . . . , q, show that there exists a chain of m edges, m \geq2q
n , each
two consecutive edges having a common vertex, arranged monotonically
with respect to the numbering.

## Solution

We shall solve the problem in the alternative formulation. Let LG(v) de-
note the length of the longest directed chain of edges in the given graph G
that begins in a vertex v and is arranged decreasingly relative to the num-
bering. By the pigeonhole principle it suﬃces to show that 
v L(v) \geq2q
in every such graph. We do this by induction on q.
For q = 1 the claim is obvious. We assume that it is true for q −1 and
consider a graph G with q edges numbered 1, . . . , q. Let the edge number
q connect vertices u and w. Removing this edge, we get a graph G′ with
q −1 edges. We then have
LG(u) \geqLG′(w) + 1, LG(w) \geqLG′(u) + 1, LG(v) \geqLG′(v) for other v.
Since  LG′(v) \geq2(q −1) by inductive assumption, it follows that
 LG(v) \geq2(q −1) + 2 = 2q as desired.
Second solution.
Let us place a spider at each vertex of the graph. Let
us now interchange the positions of the two spiders at the endpoints of
each edge, listing the edges increasingly with respect to the numbering.
This way we will move spiders exactly 2q times (two for each edge). Hence
there is a spider that will be moved at least 2q/n times. All that remains
is to notice that the path of each spider consists of edges numbered in
increasing order.
Remark.
A chain of the stated length having all vertices distinct does
not necessarily exist. An example is n = 4, q = 6 with the numbering
following the order ab, cd, ac, bd, ad, bc.
