---
title: "IMO 1986 SL 9"
description: "Prove or disprove: Given a ﬁnite set of points with integer"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1986
type: "shortlist"
number: 9
origin: "GDR"
weight: 198600009
draft: false
---

# IMO 1986 SL 9

**Origin:** GDR

## Problem

Prove or disprove: Given a ﬁnite set of points with integer
coordinates in the plane, it is possible to color some of these points red
and the remaining ones white in such a way that for any straight line L
parallel to one of the coordinate axes, the number of red colored points
and the number of white colored points on L diﬀer by at most 1.

## Solution

We shall use induction on the number n of points. The case n = 1 is
trivial. Let us suppose that the statement is true for all 1, 2, . . ., n −1,
and that we are given a set T of n points.
If there exists a point P \inT and a line l that is parallel to an axis and
contains P and no other points of T , then by the inductive hypothesis we
can color the set T \ {P} and then use a suitable color for P. Let us now
suppose that whenever a line parallel to an axis contains a point of T , it
contains another point of T . It follows that for an arbitrary point P0 \inT
we can choose points P1, P2, . . . such that PkPk+1 is parallel to the x-axis
for k even, and to the y-axis for k odd. We eventually come to a pair of
integers (r, s) of the same parity, 0 \leqr < s, such that lines PrPr+1 and
PsPs+1 coincide. Hence the closed polygonal line Pr+1Pr+2 . . . PsPr+1 is of
even length. Thus we may color the points of this polygonal line alternately
and then apply the inductive assumption for the rest of the set T . The
induction is complete.

Second solution. Let P1, P2, . . . , Pk be the points lying on a line l parallel
to an axis, going from left to right or from up to down. We draw segments
joining P1 with P2, P3 with P4, and generally P2i−1 with P2i. Having this
done for every such line l, we obtain a set of segments forming certain
polygonal lines. If one of these polygonal lines is closed, then it must have
an even number of vertices. Thus, we can color the vertices on each of the
polygonal lines alternately (a point not lying on any of the polygonal lines
may be colored arbitrarily). The obtained coloring satisﬁes the conditions.
