---
title: "IMO 1990 SL 16"
description: "Is there a 1990-gon with the following properties (i) and"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1990
type: "shortlist"
number: 16
origin: "NET"
weight: 199000016
draft: false
---

# IMO 1990 SL 16

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

Is there a 1990-gon with the following properties (i) and
(ii)?
(i) All angles are equal;
(ii) The lengths of the 1990 sides are a permutation of the numbers
12, 22, . . . , 19892, 19902.

## Solution

Let A0A1 . . . A1989 be the desired 1990-gon. We also deﬁne A1990 = A0.
Let O be an arbitrary point. For 1 \leqi \leq1990 let Bi be a point such that
−−\to
OBi = −−−−\to
Ai−1Ai. We deﬁne B0 = B1990. The points Bi must satisfy the fol-
lowing properties: \angleBiOBi+1 =
2\pi
1990, 0 \leqi \leq1989, lengths of OBi are a
permutation of 12, 22, . . . , 19892, 19902, and 1989
i=0
−−\to
OBi = −\to0 . Conversely,
any such set of points Bi corresponds to a desired 1990-gon. Hence, our
goal is to construct vectors −−\to
OBi satisfying all the stated properties.
Let us group vectors of lengths (2n −1)2 and (2n)2 into pairs and put
them diametrically opposite each other. The length of the resulting vec-
tors is 4n −1. The problem thus reduces to arranging vectors of lengths
3, 7, 11, . . ., 3979 at mutual angles of
2\pi
995 such that their sum is −\to0 . We
partition the 995 directions into 199 sets of ﬁve directions at mutual an-
gles 2\pi
5 . The directions when intersected with a unit circle form a regular
pentagon. We group the set of lengths of vectors 3, 7, . . ., 3979 into 199
sets of ﬁve consecutive elements of the set. We place each group of lengths
on directions belonging to the same group of directions, thus constructing
ﬁve vectors. We use that −−\to
OC1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + −−\to
OCn = 0 where O is the center of
a regular n-gon C1 . . . Cn. In other words, vectors of equal lengths along
directions that form a regular n-gon cancel each other out. Such are the
groups of ﬁve directions. Hence, we can assume for each group of ﬁve
lengths for its lengths to be {0, 4, 8, 12, 16}. We place these ﬁve lengths

in a random fashion on a single group of directions. We then rotate the
conﬁguration clockwise by
2\pi
199 to cover other groups of directions and re-
peat until all groups of directions are exhausted. It follows that all vectors
of each of the lengths {0, 4, 8, 12, 16} will form a regular 199-gon and will
thus cancel each other out.
We have thus constructed a way of obtaining points Bi and have hence
shown the existence of the 1990-gon satisfying (i) and (ii).
