---
title: "IMO 1990 SL 17"
description: "Unit cubes are made into beads by drilling a hole through"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1990
type: "shortlist"
number: 17
origin: "NET"
weight: 199000017
draft: false
---

# IMO 1990 SL 17

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

Unit cubes are made into beads by drilling a hole through
them along a diagonal. The beads are put on a string in such a way that
they can move freely in space under the restriction that the vertices of
two neighboring cubes are touching. Let A be the beginning vertex and B
be the end vertex. Let there be p \times q \times r cubes on the string (p, q, r \geq1).
(a) Determine for which values of p, q, and r it is possible to build a block
with dimensions p, q, and r. Give reasons for your answers.
(b) The same question as (a) with the extra condition that A = B.

## Solution

Let us set a coordinate system denoting the vertices of the block. The
vertices of the unit cubes of the block can be described as {(x, y, z) | 0 \leq
x \leqp, 0 \leqy \leqq, 0 \leqz \leqr}, and we restrict our attention to only
these points. Suppose the point A is ﬁxed at (a, b, c). Then for every other
necklace point (x, y, z) numbers x −a, y −b, and z −c must be of equal
parity. Conversely, every point (x, y, z) such that x−a, y−b, and z −c are
of the same parity has to be a necklace point. Consider the graph G whose
vertices are all such points and edges are all diagonals of the unit cubes
through these points. In part (a) we are looking for an open or closed
Euler path, while in part (b) we are looking for a closed Euler path.
Necklace points in the interior of the (p, q, r) box have degree 8, points on
the surface have degree 4, points on the edge have degree 2, and points
on the corner have degree 1. A closed Euler path can be formed if and
only if all vertices are of an even degree, while an open Euler path can be
formed if and only if exactly two vertices have an odd degree. Hence the
problem in part (a) amounts to being able to choose a point A such that
0 or 2 corner vertices are necklace vertices, whereas in part (b) no corner
points can be necklace vertices. We distinguish two cases.
(i) At least two of p, q, r, say p, q, are even. We can choose a = 1, b = c =
0. In this case none of the corners is a necklace point. Hence a closed
Euler path exists.
(ii) At most one of p, q, r is even. However one chooses A, exactly two
necklace points are at the corners. Hence, an open Euler path exists,
but it is impossible to form a closed path.
Hence, in part (a), a box can be made of all (p, q, r) and in part (b) only
those (p, q, r) where at least two of the numbers are even.
