---
title: "IMO 1990 SL 22"
description: "Ten localities are served by two international airlines such"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1990
type: "shortlist"
number: 22
origin: "ROM"
weight: 199000022
draft: false
---

# IMO 1990 SL 22

**Origin:** ROM

## Problem

Ten localities are served by two international airlines such
that there exists a direct service (without stops) between any two of these
localities and all airline schedules oﬀer round-trip service between the
cities they serve. Prove that at least one of the airlines can oﬀer two
disjoint round trips each containing an odd number of landings.

## Solution

We can assume without loss of generality that each connection is ser-
viced by only one airline and the problem reduces to ﬁnding two disjoint
monochromatic cycles of the same color and of odd length on a complete
graph of 10 points colored by two colors. We use the following two stan-
dard lemmas:
Lemma 1. Given a complete graph on six points whose edges are colored
with two colors there exists a monochromatic triangle.
Proof. Let us denote the vertices by c1, c2, c3, c4, c5, c6. By the pigeonhole
principle at least three vertices out of c1, say c2, c3, c4, are of the
same color, let us call it red. Assuming that at least one of the edges
connecting points c2, c3, c4 is red, the connected points along with c1
form a red triangle. Otherwise, edges connecting c2, c3, c4 are all of
the opposite color, let us call it blue, and hence in all cases we have a
monochromatic triangle.
Lemma 2. Given a complete graph on ﬁve points whose edges are colored
two colors there exists a monochromatic triangle or a monochromatic
cycle of length ﬁve.
Proof. Let us denote the vertices by c1, c2, c3, c4, c5. Assume that out of
a point ci three vertices are of the same color. We can then proceed
as in Lemma 1 to obtain a monochromatic triangle. Otherwise, each

point is connected to other points with exactly two red and two blue
vertices. Hence, we obtain monochromatic cycles starting from a single
point and moving along the edges of the same color. Since each cycle
must be of length at least three (i.e., we cannot have more than one
cycle of one color), it follows that for both red and blue we must have
one cycle of length ﬁve of that color.
We now apply the lemmas. Let us denote the vertices by c1, c2, . . . , c10. We
apply Lemma 1 to vertices c1, . . . , c6 to obtain a monochromatic triangle.
Out of the seven remaining vertices we select 6 and again apply Lemma 1
to obtain another monochromatic triangle. If they are of the same color, we
are done. Otherwise, out of the nine edges connecting the two triangles
of opposite color at least 5 are of the same color, we can assume blue
w.l.o.g., and hence a vertex of a red triangle must contain at least two
blue edges whose endpoints are connected with a blue edge. Hence there
exist two triangles of diﬀerent colors joined at a vertex. These take up
ﬁve points. Applying Lemma 2 on the ﬁve remaining points, we obtain a
monochromatic cycle of odd length that is of the same color as one of the
two joined triangles and disjoint from both of them.
