---
title: "IMO 1990 SL 28"
description: "Prove that on the coordinate plane it is impossible to draw a"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1990
type: "shortlist"
number: 28
origin: "USS"
weight: 199000028
draft: false
---

# IMO 1990 SL 28

**Origin:** USS

## Problem

Prove that on the coordinate plane it is impossible to draw a
closed broken line such that
(i) the coordinates of each vertex are rational;
(ii) the length each of its edges is 1;
(iii) the line has an odd number of vertices.

## Solution

Let us ﬁrst prove the following lemma.
Lemma. Let (b′/a′, d′/c′) and (b′′/a′′, d′′/c′′) be two points with rational
coordinates where the fractions given are irreducible. If both a′ and c′
are odd and the distance between the two points is 1 then it follows
that a′′ and c′′ are odd, and that b′ + d′ and b′′ + d′′ are of a diﬀerent
parity.
Proof. Let b/a and d/c be irreducible fractions such that b′/a′ −b′′/a′′ =
b/a and d′/c′ −d′′/c′′ = d/c. Then it follows that b2/a2 + d2/c2 =
1 ⇒b2c2 + a2d2 = a2c2. Since (a, b) = 1 and (c, d) = 1 it follows that
a | c, c | a and hence a = c. Consequently b2 + d2 = a2. Since a is
mutually co-prime to b and d it follows that a and b+d are odd. From
b′′/a′′ = b/a + b′/a′ we get that a′′ | aa′, so a′′ is odd. Similarly, c′′ is

odd as well. Now it follows that b′′ \equivb + b′ and similarly d′′ \equivd + d′
(mod 2). Hence b′′ + d′′ \equivb′ + d′ + b + d \equivb′ + d′ + 1 (mod 2), from
which it follows that b′ + d′ and b′′ + d′′ are of a diﬀerent parity.
Without loss of generality we start from the origin of the coordinate sys-
tem (0/1, 0/1). Initially b + d = 0 and after moving to each subsequent
point along the broken line b + d changes parity by the lemma. Hence it
will not be possible to return to the origin after an odd number of steps
since b + d will be odd.
