---
title: "IMO 1990 SL 4"
description: "Assume that the set of all positive integers is decomposed into"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1990
type: "shortlist"
number: 4
origin: "CZS"
weight: 199000004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1990 SL 4

**Origin:** CZS

## Problem

Assume that the set of all positive integers is decomposed into
r (disjoint) subsets A1 \cupA2 \cup\cdot \cdot \cdot Ar = N. Prove that one of them, say
Ai, has the following property: There exists a positive m such that for
any k one can ﬁnd numbers a1, a2, . . . , ak in Ai with 0 < aj+1 −aj \leqm
(1 \leqj \leqk −1).

## Solution

Assuming that A1 is not such a set Ai, it follows that for every m there
exist m consecutive numbers not in A1. It follows that A2 \cupA3 \cup\cdot \cdot \cdot \cupAr
contains arbitrarily long sequences of numbers. Inductively, let us assume
that Aj \cupAj+1 \cup\cdot \cdot \cdot\cupAr contains arbitrarily long sequences of consecutive
numbers and none of A1, A2, . . . , Aj−1 is the desired set Ai. Let us assume
that Aj is also not Ai. Hence for each m there exists k(m) such that among
k(m) elements of Aj there exist two consecutive elements that diﬀer by at
least m. Let us consider m\cdotk(m) consecutive numbers in Aj\cup\cdot \cdot \cdot\cupAr, which
exist by the induction hypothesis. Then either Aj contains fewer than
k(m) of these integers, in which case Aj+1\cup\cdot \cdot \cdot\cupAr contains m consecutive
integers by the pigeonhole principle or Aj contains k(m) integers among
which there exists a gap of length m of consecutive integers that belong
to Aj+1 \cup\cdot \cdot \cdot \cupAr. Hence we have proven that Aj+1 \cup\cdot \cdot \cdot \cupAr contains
sequences of integers of arbitrary length. By induction, assuming that
A1, A2, . . . , Ar−1 do not satisfy the conditions to be the set Ai, it follows
that Ar contains sequences of consecutive integers of arbitrary length and
hence satisﬁes the conditions necessary for it to be the set Ai.
