---
title: "IMO 1979 SL 12"
description: "Let R be a set of exactly 6 elements. A set F of subsets of R"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1979
type: "shortlist"
number: 12
origin: "GDR"
weight: 197900012
draft: false
---

# IMO 1979 SL 12

**Origin:** GDR

## Problem

Let R be a set of exactly 6 elements. A set F of subsets of R
is called an S-family over R if and only if it satisﬁes the following three
conditions:
(i) For no two sets X, Y in F is X \subseteqY ;
(ii) For any three sets X, Y, Z in F, X \cupY \cupZ ̸= R,
(iii) %
X\inF X = R.
We deﬁne |F| to be the number of elements of F (i.e., the number of
subsets of R belonging to F). Determine, if it exists, h = max |F|, the
maximum being taken over all S-families over R.

## Solution

The ﬁrst criterion ensures that all sets in an S-family are distinct. Since
the number of diﬀerent families of subsets is ﬁnite, h has to exist. In
fact, we will show that h = 11. First of all, if there exists X \inF such
that |X| \geq5, then by (3) there exists Y \inF such that X \cupY = R. In
this case |F| is at most 2. Similarly, for |X| = 4, for the remaining two
elements either there exists a subset in F that contains both, in which case
we obtain the previous case, or there exist diﬀerent Y and Z containing
them, in which case X \cupY \cupZ = R, which must not happen. Hence we
can assume |X| \leq4 for all X \inF.
Assume |X| = 1 for some X. In that case other sets must not contain that
subset and hence must be contained in the remaining 5-element subset.
These elements must not be subsets of each other. From elementary com-
binatorics, the largest number of subsets of a 5-element set of which none
is subset of another is
5

= 10. This occurs when we take all 2-element
subsets. These subsets also satisfy (2). Hence |F|max = 11 in this case.
Otherwise, let us assume |X| = 3 for some X. Let us deﬁne the following
families of subsets: G = {Z = Y \X | Y \inF} and H = {Z = Y \capX | Y \in
F}. Then no two sets in G must complement each other in R \ X, and
G must cover this set. Hence G contains exactly the sets of each of the
remaining 3 elements. For each element of G no two sets in H of which
one is a subset of another may be paired with it. There can be only 3 such
subsets selected within a 3-element set X. Hence the number of remaining
sets is smaller than 3 \cdot 3 = 9. Hence in this case |F|max = 10.

In the remaining case all subsets have two elements. There are
6

= 15
of them. But for every three that complement each other one must be
discarded; hence the maximal number for F in this case is 2 \cdot 15/3 = 10.
It follows that h = 11.
