---
title: "IMO 1985 SL 14"
description: "4b.(IRE 4) A set of 1985 points is distributed around the circumference"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1985
type: "shortlist"
number: 14
origin: ""
weight: 198500014
draft: false
---

# IMO 1985 SL 14

## Problem

4b.(IRE 4) A set of 1985 points is distributed around the circumference
of a circle and each of the points is marked with 1 or −1. A point is called
“good” if the partial sums that can be formed by starting at that point
and proceeding around the circle for any distance in either direction are
all strictly positive. Show that if the number of points marked with −1 is
less than 662, there must be at least one good point.

## Solution

It suﬃces to prove the existence of a good point in the case of exactly 661
−1’s. We prove by induction on k that in any arrangement with 3k + 2
points k of which are −1’s a good point exists. For k = 1 this is clear by
inspection. Assume that the assertion holds for all arrangements of 3n+2
points and consider an arrangement of 3(n + 1) + 2 points. Now there
exists a sequence of consecutive −1’s surrounded by two +1’s. There is a
point P which is good for the arrangement obtained by removing the two
+1’s bordering the sequence of −1’s and one of these −1’s. Since P is out
of this sequence, clearly the removal either leaves a partial sum as it was
or diminishes it by 1, so P is good for the original arrangement.
Second solution. Denote the number on an arbitrary point by a1, and the
numbers on successive points going in the positive direction by a2, a3, . . .
(in particular, ak+1985 = ak). We deﬁne the partial sums s0 = 0, sn =
a1 + a2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an for all positive integers n; then sk+1985 = sk + s1985
and s1985 \geq663. Since s1985m \geq663m and 3 \cdot 663m > 1985(m + 2) + 1
for large m, not all values 0, 1, 2, . . .663m can appear thrice among the
1985(m + 2) + 1 sums s−1985, s−1984, . . . , s1985(m+1) (and none of them
appears out of this set). Thus there is an integral value s > 0 that appears
at most twice as a partial sum, say sk = sl = s, k < l. Then either ak or
al is a good point. Actually, si > s must hold for all i > l, and si < s for
all i < k (otherwise, the sum s would appear more than twice). Also, for
the same reason there cannot exist indices p, q between k and l such that
sp > s and sq < s; i.e., for k < p < l, sp’s are either all greater than or
equal to s, or smaller than or equal to s. In the former case ak is good,
while in the latter al is good.
