---
title: "IMO 1985 SL 15"
description: "5a.(FRA 3) Let K and K′ be two squares in the same plane, their sides"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1985
type: "shortlist"
number: 15
origin: ""
weight: 198500015
draft: false
---

# IMO 1985 SL 15

## Problem

5a.(FRA 3) Let K and K′ be two squares in the same plane, their sides
of equal length. Is it possible to decompose K into a ﬁnite number of tri-
angles T1, T2, . . . , Tp with mutually disjoint interiors and ﬁnd translations
t1, t2, . . . , tp such that
K′ =
p2
i=1
ti(Ti)?

## Solution

There is no loss of generality if
we assume K
= ABCD, K′ =
AB′C′D′, and that K′ is obtained
from
K
bya
clockwise
rotation
around A by \varphi, 0 \leq\varphi \leq\pi/4. Let
C′D′, B′C′, and the parallel to AB
through D′ meet the line BC at E,
F, and G respectively. Let us now
choose points E′ \inAB′, G′ \inAB,
C′′ \inAD′, and E′′ \inAD such that
A
B
B′
C
C′
C′′
D
D′
D′′
E
E′
E′′
F
G
G′
H
H′
the triangles AE′G′ and AC′′E′′ are translates of the triangles D′EG
and FC′E respectively. Since AE′ = D′E and AC′′ = FC′, we have
C′′E′′ = C′E = B′E′ and C′′D′ = B′F, which imply that \triangleE′′C′′D′ is a

translate of \triangleE′B′F, and consequently E′′D′ = E′F and E′′D′ \parallelE′F. It
follows that there exist points H \inCD, H′ \inBF, and D′′ \inE′G′ such
that E′′D′HD is a translate of E′FH′D′′. The remaining parts of K and
K′ are the rectangles D′GCH and D′′H′BG′ of equal area.
We shall now show that two rectangles with parallel sides and equal ar-
eas can be decomposed into translation invariant parts. Let the sides of
the rectangles XY ZT and X′Y ′Z′T ′ (XY \parallelX′Y ′) satisfy X′Y ′ < XY ,
Y ′Z′ > Y Z, and X′Y ′ \cdot Y ′Z′ = XY \cdot Y Z. Suppose that 2X′Y ′ > XY
(otherwise, we may cut oﬀcongruent rectangles from both the original
ones until we reduce them to the case of 2X′Y ′ > XY ). Let U \inXY
and V \inZT be points such that Y U = TV = X′Y ′ and W \inXV be a
point such that UW \parallelXT . Then translating \triangleXUW to a triangle V ZR
and \triangleXV T to a triangle WRS results in a rectangle UY RS congruent
to X′Y ′Z′T ′.
Thus we have partitioned K and K′ into translation-invariant parts. Al-
though not all the parts are triangles, we may simply triangulate them.
