---
title: "IMO 1985 SL 22"
description: "A circle with center O passes through points A and C and"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1985
type: "shortlist"
number: 22
origin: "USS"
weight: 198500022
draft: false
---

# IMO 1985 SL 22

**Origin:** USS

## Problem

A circle with center O passes through points A and C and
intersects the sides AB and BC of the triangle ABC at points K and N,
respectively. The circumscribed circles of the triangles ABC and KBN
intersect at two distinct points B and M. Prove that \angleOMB = 90◦.

## Solution

Assume that \triangleABC is acute (the case of an obtuse \triangleABC is similar).
Let S and R be the centers of the circumcircles of \triangleABC and \triangleKBN,
respectively. Since \angleBNK = \angleBAC, the triangles BNK and BAC are
similar. Now we have \angleCBR = \angleABS = 90◦−\angleACB, which gives us
BR \perpAC and consequently BR \parallelOS. Similarly BS \perpKN implies that
BS \parallelOR. Hence BROS is a parallelogram.
Let L be the point symmetric to B with respect to R. Then RLOS is also
a parallelogram, and since SR \perpBM, we obtain OL \perpBM. However, we
also have LM \perpBM, from which we conclude that O, L, M are collinear
and OM \perpBM.
Second solution.
The lines BM, NK, and CA are the radical axes of
pairs of the three circles, and hence they
intersect at a single point P. Also,
the quadrilateral MNCP is cyclic.
Let OA = OC = OK = ON = r.
We then have
BM \cdot BP = BN \cdot BC = OB2 −r2,
PM \cdot PB = PN \cdot PK = OP 2 −r2.
It follows that OB2 −OP 2
=
BP(BM −PM) = BM 2 −PM 2,
which implies that OM \perpMB.
A
B
C
K
L
M
N
O
P
R
S
