---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 1"
description: "An inﬁnite square grid is colored in the chessboard pattern."
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 1
origin: "BLR"
weight: 199700001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 1

**Origin:** BLR

## Problem

An inﬁnite square grid is colored in the chessboard pattern.
For any pair of positive integers m, n consider a right-angled triangle
whose vertices are grid points and whose legs, of lengths m and n, run
along the lines of the grid. Let Sb be the total area of the black part of
the triangle and Sw the total area of its white part. Deﬁne the function
f(m, n) = |Sb −Sw|.
(a) Calculate f(m, n) for all m, n that have the same parity.
(b) Prove that f(m, n) \leq1
2 max(m, n).
(c) Show that f(m, n) is not bounded from above.

## Solution

Let ABC be the given triangle, with \angleB = 90◦and AB = m, BC = n.
For an arbitrary polygon P we denote by w(P) and b(P) respectively the
total areas of the white and black parts of P.
(a) Let D be the fourth vertex of the rectangle ABCD. When m and
n are of the same parity, the coloring of the rectangle ABCD is
centrally symmetric with respect to the midpoint of AC. It fol-
lows that w(ABC) = 1
2w(ABCD) and b(ABC) = 1
2b(ABCD); thus
f(m, n) = 1
2|w(ABCD) −b(ABCD)|. Hence f(m, n) equals 1
2 if m
and n are both odd, and 0 otherwise.
(b) The result when m, n are of the same parity follows from (a). Suppose
that m > n, where m and n are of diﬀerent parity. Choose a point
E on AB such that AE = 1. Since by (a) |w(EBC) −b(EBC)| =
f(m −1, n) \leq
2, we have f(m, n) \leq
2 + |w(EAC) −b(EAC)| \leq
2 + S(EAC) = 1
2 + n−1
= n
2 . Therefore f(m, n) \leq1
2 min(m, n).
(c) Let us calculate f(m, n) for m = 2k+1, n = 2k, k \inN. With E deﬁned
as in (b), we have BE = BC = 2k. If the square at B is w.l.o.g. white,
CE passes only through black squares. The white part of \triangleEAC then
consists of 2k similar triangles with areas 1
i
2k
i
2k+1 =
i2
4k(2k+1), where
i = 1, 2, . . ., 2k. The total white area of EAC is
4k(2k + 1)(12 + 22 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + (2k)2) = 4k + 1
.
Therefore the black area is (8k−1)/12, and f(2k+1, 2k) = (2k−1)/6,
which is not bounded.
