---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 13"
description: "In town A, there are n girls and n boys, and each girl knows each"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 13
origin: "IND"
weight: 199700013
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 13

**Origin:** IND

## Problem

In town A, there are n girls and n boys, and each girl knows each
boy. In town B, there are n girls g1, g2, . . . , gn and 2n −1 boys b1, b2, . . .,
b2n−1. The girl gi, i = 1, 2, . . ., n, knows the boys b1, b2, . . . , b2i−1, and no
others. For all r = 1, 2, . . ., n, denote by A(r), B(r) the number of diﬀerent
ways in which r girls from town A, respectively town B, can dance with r
boys from their own town, forming r pairs, each girl with a boy she knows.
Prove that A(r) = B(r) for each r = 1, 2, . . . , n.

## Solution

Denote A(r) and B(r) by A(n, r) and B(n, r) respectively.
The numbers A(n, r) can be found directly: one can choose r girls and r
boys in
n
r
2 ways, and pair them in r! ways. Hence
A(n, r) =
n
r
2
\cdot r! =
n!2
(n −r)!2r!.
Now we establish a recurrence relation between the B(n, r)’s. Let n \geq2
and 2 \leqr \leqn. There are two cases for a desired selection of r pairs of
girls and boys:
(i) One of the girls dancing is gn. Then the other r −1 girls can choose
their partners in B(n −1, r −1) ways and gn can choose any of the
remaining 2n −r boys. Thus, the total number of choices in this case
is (2n −r)B(n −1, r −1).
(ii) gn is not dancing. Then there are exactly B(n −1, r) possible choices.
Therefore, for every n \geq2 it holds that
B(n, r) = (2n −r)B(n −1, r −1) + B(n −1, r)
for r = 2, . . . , n.
Here we assume that B(n, r) = 0 for r > n, while B(n, 1) = 1 + 3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot +
(2n −1) = n2.
It is directly veriﬁed that the numbers A(n, r) satisfy the same initial
conditions and recurrence relations, from which it follows that A(n, r) =
B(n, r) for all n and r \leqn.
