---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 16"
description: "In an acute-angled triangle ABC, let AD, BE be altitudes and"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 16
origin: "BLR"
weight: 199700016
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 16

**Origin:** BLR

## Problem

In an acute-angled triangle ABC, let AD, BE be altitudes and
AP, BQ internal bisectors. Denote by I and O the incenter and the cir-
cumcenter of the triangle, respectively. Prove that the points D, E, and
I are collinear if and only if the points P, Q, and O are collinear.

## Solution

Let da(X), db(X), dc(X) denote the distances of a point X interior to
\triangleABC from the lines BC, CA, AB respectively. We claim that X \inPQ
if and only if da(X) + db(X) = dc(X). Indeed, if X \inPQ and PX =
kPQ then da(X) = kda(Q), db(X) = (1 −k)db(P), and dc(X) = (1 −
k)dc(P)+kdc(Q), and simple substitution yields da(X)+db(X) = dc(X).
The converse follows easily. In particular, O \inPQ if and only if da(O) +
db(O) = dc(O), i.e., cos \alpha + cos \beta = cos \gamma.
We shall now show that I \inDE if and only if AE + BD = DE. Let K
be the point on the segment DE such that AE = EK. Then \angleEKA =
2\angleDEC = 1
2\angleCBA = \angleIBA; hence the points A, B, I, K are concyclic.
The point I lies on DE if and only if \angleBKD = \angleBAI = 1
2\angleBAC =
2\angleCDE = \angleDBK, which is equivalent to KD = BD, i.e., to AE+BD =
DE. But since AE = AB cos \alpha, BD = AB cos \beta, and DE = AB cos \gamma, we
have that I \inDE ⇔cos \alpha + cos \beta = cos \gamma. The conditions for O \inPQ
and I \inDE are thus equivalent.
Second solution. We know that three points X, Y, Z are collinear if and
only if for some \lambda, µ \inR with sum 1, we have \lambda−−\to
CX + µ−−\to
CY = −\to
CZ.
Specially, if −−\to
CX = p−\to
CA and −−\to
CY = q−−\to
CB for some p, q, and −\to
CZ = k−\to
CA +
l−−\to
CB, then Z lies on XY if and only if kq + lp = pq.
Using known relations in a triangle we directly obtain
−−\to
CP =
sin \beta
sin \beta + sin \gamma
−−\to
CB,
−−\to
CQ =
sin \alpha
sin \alpha + sin \gamma
−\to
CA,
−−\to
CO = sin 2\alpha \cdot −\to
CA + sin 2\beta \cdot −−\to
CB
sin 2\alpha + sin 2\beta + sin 2\gamma ;
−−\to
CD =
tan \beta
tan \beta + tan \gamma
−−\to
CB,
−−\to
CE =
tan \beta
tan \beta + tan \gamma
−\to
CA,
−\to
CI = sin \alpha \cdot −\to
CA + sin \beta \cdot −−\to
CB
sin \alpha + sin \beta + sin \gamma
.

Now by the above considerations we get that the conditions (1) P, Q, O are
collinear and (2) D, E, I are collinear are both equivalent to cos \alpha+cos \beta =
cos \gamma.
