---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 2"
description: "Let R1, R2, . . . be the family of ’¼ünite sequences of positive inte-"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 2
origin: "CAN"
weight: 199700002
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 2

**Origin:** CAN

## Problem

Let R1, R2, . . . be the family of ’¼ünite sequences of positive inte-
gers de’¼üned by the following rules: R1 = (1), and if RnŌłÆ1 = (x1, . . . , xs),
then
Rn = (1, 2, . . . , x1, 1, 2, . . ., x2, . . . , 1, 2, . . . , xs, n).
For example, R2 = (1, 2), R3 = (1, 1, 2, 3), R4 = (1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 2, 3, 4).
Prove that if n > 1, then the kth term from the left in Rn is equal to 1 if
and only if the kth term from the right in Rn is di’¼Ćerent from 1.

## Solution

For any sequence X = (x1, x2, . . . , xn) let us de’¼üne
X = (1, 2, . . . , x1, 1, 2, . . ., x2, . . . , 1, 2, . . . , xn).
Also, for any two sequences A, B we denote their concatenation by AB.
It clearly holds that AB = A B. The sequences R1, R2, . . . are given by
R1 = (1) and Rn = RnŌłÆ1(n) for n > 1.
We consider the family of sequences Qni for n, i \inN, i \leqn, de’¼üned as
follows:
Qn1 = (1),
Qnn = (n),
and
Qni = QnŌłÆ1,iŌłÆ1QnŌłÆ1,i
if 1 < i < n.
These sequences form a Pascal-like triangle, as shown in the picture below:
Q1i :
Q2i :
Q3i :
Q4i :
Q5i :
1112
112123
1234

We claim that Rn is in fact exactly Qn1Qn2 . . . Qnn. Before proving this,
we observe that Qni = QnŌłÆ1,i. This follows by induction, because Qni =
QnŌłÆ1,iŌłÆ1QnŌłÆ1,i = QnŌłÆ2,iŌłÆ1 QnŌłÆ2,i = QnŌłÆ1,i for n \geq3, i \geq2 (the cases
i = 1 and n = 1, 2 are trivial). Now R1 = Q11 and
Rn = RnŌłÆ1(n) = QnŌłÆ1,1 . . . QnŌłÆ1,nŌłÆ1(n) = Qn,1 . . . Qn,nŌłÆ1Qn,n
for n \geq2, which justi’¼ües our claim by induction.
Now we know enough about the sequence Rn to return to the question
of the problem. We use induction on n once again. The result is obvious
for n = 1 and n = 2. Given any n \geq3, consider the kth elements of Rn
from the left, say u, and from the right, say v. Assume that u is a member
of Qnj, and consequently that v is a member of Qn,n+1ŌłÆj. Then u and
v come from symmetric positions of RnŌłÆ1 (either from QnŌłÆ1,j, QnŌłÆ1,nŌłÆj,
or from QnŌłÆ1,jŌłÆ1, QnŌłÆ1,n+1ŌłÆj), and by the inductive hypothesis exactly
one of them is 1.
