---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 23"
description: "Let ABCD be a convex quadrilateral and O the intersection of"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 23
origin: "GBR"
weight: 199700023
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 23

**Origin:** GBR

## Problem

Let ABCD be a convex quadrilateral and O the intersection of
its diagonals AC and BD. If
OA sin \angleA + OC sin \angleC = OB sin \angleB + OD sin \angleD,
prove that ABCD is cyclic.

## Solution

Let K, L, M, and N be the projections of O onto the lines AB, BC, CD,
and DA, and let \alpha1, \alpha2, \alpha3, \alpha4, \beta1, \beta2, \beta3, \beta4 denote the angles OAB,
OBC, OCD, ODA, OAD, OBA, OCB, ODC, respectively.
We start with the following observation: Since NK is a chord of the circle
with diameter OA, we have OA sin \angleA = NK = ON cos \alpha1 + OK cos \beta1
(because \angleONK = \alpha1 and \angleOKN = \beta1). Analogous equalities also
hold: OB sin \angleB = KL = OK cos \alpha2 + OL cos \beta2, OC sin \angleC = LM =
OL cos \alpha3 + OM cos \beta3 and OD sin \angleD = MN = OM cos \alpha4 + ON cos \beta4.
Now the condition in the problem can be restated as NK + LM = KL +
MN (i.e., KLMN is circumscribed), i.e.,
OK(cos \beta1 −cos \alpha2) + OL(cos \alpha3 −cos \beta2)
+OM(cos \beta3 −cos \alpha4) + ON(cos \alpha1 −cos \beta4) = 0.
(1)
To prove that ABCD is cyclic, it suﬃces to show that \alpha1 = \beta4. Assume
the contrary, and let w.l.o.g. \alpha1 > \beta4. Then point A lies inside the circle
BCD, which is further equivalent to \beta1 > \alpha2. On the other hand, from
\alpha1 + \beta2 = \alpha3 + \beta4 we deduce \alpha3 > \beta2, and similarly \beta3 > \alpha4. Therefore,

since the cosine is strictly decreasing on (0, \pi), the left side of (1) is strictly
negative, yielding a contradiction.
