---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 26"
description: "For every integer n \geq2 determine the minimum value that the"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 26
origin: "ITA"
weight: 199700026
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 26

**Origin:** ITA

## Problem

For every integer n \geq2 determine the minimum value that the
sum a0 + a1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an can take for nonnegative numbers a0, a1, . . . , an
satisfying the condition
a0 = 1,
ai \leqai+1 + ai+2
for i = 0, . . . , n ŌłÆ2.

## Solution

Let us ’¼ürst examine the case that all the inequalities in the problem are
actually equalities. Then anŌłÆ2 = anŌłÆ1 + an, anŌłÆ3 = 2anŌłÆ1 + an, . . . , a0 =
FnanŌłÆ1 + FnŌłÆ1an = 1, where Fn is the nth Fibonacci number. Then it
is easy to see (from F1 + F2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + Fk = Fk+2) that
a0 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an =
(Fn+2 ŌłÆ1)anŌłÆ1 + Fn+1an = Fn+2ŌłÆ1
Fn
+

Fn+1 ŌłÆFnŌłÆ1(Fn+2ŌłÆ1)
Fn

an. Since
FnŌłÆ1(Fn+2ŌłÆ1)
Fn
\leqFn+1, it follows that a0 + a1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an \geqFn+2ŌłÆ1
Fn
, with
equality holding if and only if an = 0 and anŌłÆ1 =
Fn .
We denote by Mn the required minimum in the general case. We shall
prove by induction that Mn = Fn+2ŌłÆ1
Fn
. For M1 = 1 and M2 = 2 it is easy
to show that the formula holds; hence the inductive basis is true. Suppose
that n > 2. The sequences 1, a2
a1 , . . . , an
a1 and 1, a3
a2 , . . . , an
a2 also satisfy the
conditions of the problem. Hence we have
a0 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an = a0 + a1

1 + a2
a1
+ \cdot \cdot \cdot + an
a1

\geq1 + a1MnŌłÆ1
and
a0 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an = a0 + a1 + a2

1 + a3
a2
+ \cdot \cdot \cdot + an
a2

\geq1 + a1 + a2MnŌłÆ2.
Multiplying the ’¼ürst inequality by MnŌłÆ2 ŌłÆ1 and the second one by MnŌłÆ1,
adding the inequalities and using that a1 + a2 \geq1, we obtain (MnŌłÆ1 +
MnŌłÆ2 + 1)(a0 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an) \geqMnŌłÆ1MnŌłÆ2 + MnŌłÆ1 + MnŌłÆ2 + 1, so
Mn \geqMnŌłÆ1MnŌłÆ2 + MnŌłÆ1 + MnŌłÆ2 + 1
MnŌłÆ1 + MnŌłÆ2 + 1
.
Since MnŌłÆ1 =
Fn+1ŌłÆ1
FnŌłÆ1
and MnŌłÆ2 =
FnŌłÆ1
FnŌłÆ2 , the above inequality easily
yields Mn \geqFn+2ŌłÆ1
Fn
. However, we have shown above that equality can
occur; hence Fn+2ŌłÆ1
Fn
is indeed the required minimum.
