---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 4"
description: "An n \times n matrix with entries from {1, 2, . . ., 2n −1} is called"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 4
origin: "IRN"
weight: 199700004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 4

**Origin:** IRN

## Problem

An n \times n matrix with entries from {1, 2, . . ., 2n −1} is called
a coveralls matrix if for each i the union of the ith row and the ith column
contains 2n −1 distinct entries. Show that:
(a) There exist no coveralls matrices for n = 1997.
(b) Coveralls matrices exist for inﬁnitely many values of n.

## Solution

(a) Suppose that an n \times n coveralls matrix A exists for some n > 1. Let
x \in{1, 2, . . ., 2n −1} be a ﬁxed number that does not appear on the
ﬁxed diagonal of A. Such an element must exist, since the diagonal
can contain at most n diﬀerent numbers. Let us call the union of the
ith row and the ith column the ith cross. There are n crosses, and each
of them contains exactly one x. On the other hand, each entry x of A
is contained in exactly two crosses. Hence n must be even. However,
1997 is an odd number; hence no coveralls matrix exists for n = 1997.
(b) For n = 2, A2 =
1 2
3 1

is a coveralls matrix. For n = 4, one such
matrix is, for example,
A4 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
1 2 5 6
3 1 7 5
4 6 1 2
7 4 3 1
⎤
⎥⎥⎦.

This construction can be generalized. Suppose that we are given an
n \times n coveralls matrix An. Let Bn be the matrix obtained from An
by adding 2n to each entry, and Cn the matrix obtained from Bn by
replacing each diagonal entry (equal to 2n + 1 by induction) with 2n.
Then the matrix
A2n =

An Bn
Cn An

is coveralls. To show this, suppose that i \leqn (the case i > n is similar).
The ith cross is composed of the ith cross of An, the ith row of Bn, and
the ith column of Cn. The ith cross of Ai covers 1, 2, . . ., 2n −1. The
ith row of Bn covers all numbers of the form 2n+j, where j is covered
by the ith row of An (including j = 1). Similarly, the ith column of Cn
covers 2n and all numbers of the form 2n + k, where k > 1 is covered
by the ith column of An. Thus we see that all numbers are accounted
for in the ith cross of A2n, and hence A2n is a desired coveralls matrix.
It follows that we can ﬁnd a coveralls matrix whenever n is a power
of 2.
Second solution for part b. We construct a coveralls matrix explicitly
for n = 2k. We consider the coordinates/cells of the matrix elements
modulo n throughout the solution. We deﬁne the i-diagonal (0 \leqi <
n) to be the set of cells of the form (j, j + i), for all j. We note that
each cross contains exactly one cell from the 0-diagonal (the main
diagonal) and two cells from each i-diagonal. For two cells within an
i diagonal, x and y, we deﬁne x and y to be related if there exists a
cross containing both x and y. Evidently, for every cell x not on the
0-diagonal there are exactly two other cells related to it. The relation
thus breaks up each i-diagonal (i > 0) into cycles of length larger
than 1. Due to the diagonal translational symmetry (modulo n), all
the cycles within a given i-diagonal must be of equal length and thus
of an even length, since n = 2k.
The construction of a coveralls matrix is now obvious. We select a
number, say 1, to place on all the cells of the 0-diagonal. We pair
up the remaining numbers and assign each pair to an i-diagonal, say
(2i, 2i+1). Going along each cycle within the i-diagonal we alternately
assign values of 2i and 2i + 1. Since the cycle has an even length, a
cell will be related only to a cell of a diﬀerent number, and hence each
cross will contain both 2i and 2i + 1.
