---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 8"
description: "Four diﬀerent points A, B, C, D are chosen on a circle \Gamma such"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 8
origin: "GBR"
weight: 199700008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 8

**Origin:** GBR

## Problem

Four diﬀerent points A, B, C, D are chosen on a circle \Gamma such
that the triangle BCD is not right-angled. Prove that:
(a) The perpendicular bisectors of AB and AC meet the line AD at cer-
tain points W and V , respectively, and that the lines CV and BW
meet at a certain point T .
(b) The length of one of the line segments AD, BT, and CT is the sum
of the lengths of the other two.
Original formulation. In triangle ABC the angle at A is the smallest. A
line through A meets the circumcircle again at the point U lying on the
arc BC opposite to A. The perpendicular bisectors of CA and AB meet
AU at V and W, respectively, and the lines CV, BW meet at T . Show
that AU = TB + TC.

## Solution

(a) Denote by b and c the perpendicular bisectors of AB and AC re-
spectively. If w.l.o.g. b and AD do not intersect (are parallel), then
\angleBCD = \angleBAD = 90◦, a contradiction. Hence V, W are well-deﬁned.
Now, \angleDWB = 2\angleDAB and \angleDV C = 2\angleDAC as oriented an-
gles, and therefore \angle(WB, V C) = 2(\angleDV C −\angleDWB) = 2\angleBAC =
2\angleBCD is not equal to 0. Consequently CV and BW meet at some
T with \angleBTC = 2\angleBAC.

(b) Let B′ be the second point of intersection of BW with \Gamma. Clearly
AD = BB′. But we also have \angleBTC = 2\angleBAC = 2\angleBB′C, which
implies that CT = TB′. It follows that AD = BB′ = |BT \pm TB′| =
|BT \pm CT|.
Remark. This problem is also solved easily using trigonometry.
