---
title: "IMO 1997 SL 9"
description: "Let A1A2A3 be a nonisosceles triangle with incenter I. Let Ci,"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1997
type: "shortlist"
number: 9
origin: "USA"
weight: 199700009
draft: false
---

# IMO 1997 SL 9

**Origin:** USA

## Problem

Let A1A2A3 be a nonisosceles triangle with incenter I. Let Ci,
i = 1, 2, 3, be the smaller circle through I tangent to AiAi+1 and AiAi+2
(the addition of indices being mod 3). Let Bi, i = 1, 2, 3, be the second
point of intersection of Ci+1 and Ci+2. Prove that the circumcenters of
the triangles A1B1I, A2B2I, A3B3I are collinear.

## Solution

For i = 1, 2, 3 (all indices in this problem will be modulo 3) we denote by
Oi the center of Ci and by Mi the midpoint of the arc Ai+1Ai+2 that
does not contain Ai. First we have
that Oi+1Oi+2 is the perpendicular
bisector of IBi, and thus it contains
the circumcenter Ri of AiBiI. Ad-
ditionally, it is easy to show that
Ti+1Ai
=
Ti+1I and Ti+2Ai
=
Ti+2I, which implies that Ri lies on
the line Ti+1Ti+2. Therefore Ri =
Oi+1Oi+2 \capTi+1Ti+2.
A1
A2
A3
I B1
B2
B3
R3
R1
Now, the lines T1O1, T2O2, T3O3 are concurrent at I. By Desargues’s the-
orem, the points of intersection of Oi+1Oi+2 and Ti+1Ti+2, i.e., the Ri’s,
lie on a line for i = 1, 2, 3.
Second solution.
The centers of three circles passing through the same
point I and not touching each other are collinear if and only if they have
another common point. Hence it is enough to show that the circles AiBiI
have a common point other than I.
Now apply inversion at center I and with an arbitrary power. We shall
denote by X′ the image of X under this inversion. In our case, the image
of the circle Ci is the line B′
i+1B′
i+2 while the image of the line Ai+1Ai+2 is
the circle IA′
i+1A′
i+2 that is tangent to B′
iB′
i+2, and B′
iB′
i+2. These three
circles have equal radii, so their centers P1, P2, P3 form a triangle also
homothetic to \triangleB′
1B′
2B′
3. Consequently, points A′
1, A′
2, A′
3, that are the
reﬂections of I across the sides of P1P2P3, are vertices of a triangle also
homothetic to B′
1B′
2B′
3. It follows that A′
1B′
1, A′
2B′
2, A′
3B′
3 are concurrent
at some point J′, i.e., that the circles AiBiI all pass through J.
