---
title: "IMO 1992 SL 18"
description: "Let [x] denote the greatest integer less than or equal to x."
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1992
type: "shortlist"
number: 18
origin: "USA"
weight: 199200018
draft: false
---

# IMO 1992 SL 18

**Origin:** USA

## Problem

Let [x] denote the greatest integer less than or equal to x.
Pick any x1 in [0, 1) and de’¼üne the sequence x1, x2, x3, . . . by xn+1 = 0 if
xn = 0 and xn+1 = 1/xn ŌłÆ[1/xn] otherwise. Prove that
x1 + x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn < F1
F2
+ F2
F3
+ \cdot \cdot \cdot +
Fn
Fn+1
,
where F1 = F2 = 1 and Fn+2 = Fn+1 + Fn for n \geq1.

## Solution

Let us de’¼üne inductively f 1(x) = f(x) =
x+1 and f n(x) = f(f nŌłÆ1(x)),
and let gn(x) = x + f(x) + f 2(x) + \cdot \cdot \cdot + f n(x). We shall prove ’¼ürst the
following statement.

Lemma. The function gn(x) is strictly increasing on [0, 1], and gnŌłÆ1(1) =
F1/F2 + F2/F3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + Fn/Fn+1.
Proof.
Since f(x) ŌłÆf(y) =
yŌłÆx
(1+x)(1+y) is smaller in absolute value than
x ŌłÆy, it follows that x > y implies f 2k(x) > f 2k(y) and f 2k+1(x) <
f 2k+1(y), and moreover that for every integer k \geq0,
[f 2k(x) ŌłÆf 2k(y)] + [f 2k+1(x) ŌłÆf 2k+1(y)] > 0.
Hence if x > y, we have gn(x)ŌłÆgn(y) = (xŌłÆy)+ [f(x)ŌłÆf(y)]+\cdot \cdot \cdot+
[f n(x) ŌłÆf n(y)] > 0, which yields the ’¼ürst part of the lemma.
The second part follows by simple induction, since f k(1) = Fk+1/Fk+2.
If some xi = 0 and consequently xj = 0 for all j \geqi, then the problem
reduces to the problem with iŌłÆ1 instead of n. Thus we may assume that all
x1, . . . , xn are di’¼Ćerent from 0. If we write ai = [1/xi], then xi =
ai+xi+1 .
Thus we can regard xi as functions of xn depending on a1, . . . , anŌłÆ1.
Suppose that xn, anŌłÆ1, . . . , a3, a2 are ’¼üxed. Then x2, x3, . . . , xn are all
’¼üxed, and x1 =
a1+x2 is maximal when a1 = 1. Hence the sum S =
x1 + x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn is maximized for a1 = 1.
We shall show by induction on i that S is maximized for a1 = a2 = \cdot \cdot \cdot =
ai = 1. In fact, assuming that the statement holds for i ŌłÆ1 and thus a1 =
\cdot \cdot \cdot = aiŌłÆ1 = 1, having xn, anŌłÆ1, . . . , ai+1 ’¼üxed we have that xn, . . . , xi+1
are also ’¼üxed, and that xiŌłÆ1 = f(xi), . . . , x1 = f iŌłÆ1(xi). Hence by the
lemma, S = giŌłÆ1(xi) + xi+1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn is maximal when xi =
ai+xi+1 is
maximal, that is, for ai = 1. Thus the induction is complete.
It follows that x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn is maximal when a1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = anŌłÆ1 = 1, so
that x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn = gnŌłÆ1(x1). By the lemma, the latter does not exceed
gnŌłÆ1(1). This completes the proof.
Remark. The upper bound is the best possible, because it is approached
by taking xn close to 1 and inductively (in reverse) de’¼üning xiŌłÆ1 =
1+xi =
ai+xi .
