---
title: "IMO 1992 SL 4"
description: "Given nine points in space, no four of which are coplanar,"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1992
type: "shortlist"
number: 4
origin: "CHN"
weight: 199200004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1992 SL 4

**Origin:** CHN

## Problem

Given nine points in space, no four of which are coplanar,
ﬁnd the minimal natural number n such that for any coloring with red
or blue of n edges drawn between these nine points there always exists a
triangle having all edges of the same color.

## Solution

There are 36 possible edges in total. If not more than 3 edges are left
undrawn, then we can choose 6 of the given 9 points no two of which are
connected by an undrawn edge. These 6 points together with the edges
between them form a two-colored complete graph, and thus by a well-
known result there exists at least one monochromatic triangle. It follows
that n \leq33.
In order to show that n = 33, we shall give an example of a graph with 32
edges that does not contain a monochromatic triangle. Let us start with a
complete graph C5 with 5 vertices. Its edges can be colored in two colors
so that there is no monochromatic triangle (Fig. 1). Furthermore, given
a graph H with k vertices without monochromatic triangles, we can add
to it a new vertex, join it to all vertices of H except A, and color each
edge BX in the same way as AX. The obtained graph obviously contains
no monochromatic triangles. Applying this construction four times to the
graph C5 we get an example like that of Fig. 2.
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Second solution. For simplicity, we call the colors red and blue.
Let r(k, l) be the least positive integer r such that each complete r-graph
whose edges are colored in red and blue contains either a complete red
k-graph or a complete blue l-graph. Also, let t(n, k) be the greatest pos-
sible number of edges in a graph with n vertices that does not contain a
complete k-graph. These numbers exist by the theorems of Ramsey and
Tur´an.
Let us assume that r(k, l) < n. Every graph with n vertices and t(n, r(k, l))
+1 edges contains a complete subgraph with r(k, l) vertices, and this
subgraph contains either a red complete k-graph or a blue complete l-
graph.
We claim that t(n, r(k, l)) + 1 is the smallest number of edges with the
above property. By the deﬁnition of r(k, l) there exists a coloring of the
complete graph H with r(k, l) −1 vertices in two colors such that no red
complete k-graph or blue complete l-graph exists. Let cij be the color in

which the edge (i, j) of H is colored, 1 \leqi < j \leqr(k, l) −1. Consider a
complete r(k, l)−1-partite graph G with n vertices and exactly t(n, r(k, l))
edges and denote its partitions by Pi, i = 1, . . . , r(k, l)−1. If we color each
edge of H between Pi and Pj (j < i) in the color cij, we obviously obtain
a graph with n vertices and t(n, r(k, l)) edges in two colors that contains
neither a red complete k-graph nor a blue complete l-graph.
Therefore the answer to our problem is t(9, r(3, 3)) + 1 = t(9, 6) + 1 = 33.
