---
title: "IMO 1992 SL 7"
description: "Circles G, G1, G2 are three circles related to each other as"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1992
type: "shortlist"
number: 7
origin: "IND"
weight: 199200007
draft: false
---

# IMO 1992 SL 7

**Origin:** IND

## Problem

Circles G, G1, G2 are three circles related to each other as
follows: Circles G1 and G2 are externally tangent to one another at a
point W and both these circles are internally tangent to the circle G.
Points A, B, C are located on the circle G as follows: Line BC is a direct
common tangent to the pair of circles G1 and G2, and line WA is the
transverse common tangent at W to G1 and G2, with W and A lying on
the same side of the line BC. Prove that W is the incenter of the triangle
ABC.

## Solution

Let G1, G2 touch the chord BC at P, Q and touch the circle G at R, S
respectively. Let D be the midpoint of the complementary arc BC of G.
The homothety centered at R mapping G1 onto G also maps the line BC
onto a tangent of G parallel to BC. It follows that this line touches G at
point D, which is therefore the image of P under the homothety. Hence
R, P, and D are collinear. Since \angleDBP = \angleDCB = \angleDRB, it follows
that \triangleDBP ∼\triangleDRB and consequently that DP \cdotDR = DB2. Similarly,
points S, Q, D are collinear and satisfy DQ \cdot DS = DB2 = DP \cdot DR.

Hence D lies on the radical axis of the circles G1 and G2, i.e., on their
common tangent AW, which also implies that AW bisects the angle BAD.
Furthermore, since DB = DC = DW =
\sqrt
DP \cdot DR, it follows from the
lemma of (SL99-14) that W is the incenter of \triangleABC.
Remark. According to the third solution of (SL93-3), both PW and QW
contain the incenter of \triangleABC, and the result is immediate. The problem
can also be solved by inversion centered at W.
