---
title: "IMO 1992 SL 8"
description: "Show that in the plane there exists a convex polygon of 1992"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1992
type: "shortlist"
number: 8
origin: "IND"
weight: 199200008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1992 SL 8

**Origin:** IND

## Problem

Show that in the plane there exists a convex polygon of 1992
sides satisfying the following conditions:
(i) its side lengths are 1, 2, 3, . . ., 1992 in some order;
(ii) the polygon is circumscribable about a circle.
Alternative formulation. Does there exist a 1992-gon with side lengths
1, 2, 3, . . ., 1992 circumscribed about a circle? Answer the same question
for a 1990-gon.

## Solution

For simplicity, we shall write n instead of 1992.
Lemma. There exists a tangent n-gon A1A2 . . . An with sides A1A2 = a1,
A2A3 = a2, . . . , AnA1 = an if and only if the system
x1 + x2 = a1, x2 + x3 = a2, , . . . , xn + x1 = an
(1)
has a solution (x1, . . . , xn) in positive reals.
Proof. Suppose that such an n-gon A1A2 . . . An exists. Let the side AiAi+1
touch the inscribed circle at point Pi (where An+1 = A1). Then x1 =
A1Pn = A1P1, x2 = A2P1 = A2P2, . . . , xn = AnPn−1 = AnPn is
clearly a positive solution of (1).
Now suppose that the system (1) has a positive real solution (x1, . . . ,
xn). Let us draw a polygonal line A1A2 . . . An+1 touching a circle
of radius r at points P1, P2, . . . , Pn respectively such that A1P1 =
An+1Pn = x1 and AiPi = AiPi−1 = xi for i = 2, . . . , n. Observe that
OA1 = OAn+1 =

x2
1 + r2 and
the function f(r) = \angleA1OA2 +
\angleA2OA3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + \angleAnOAn+1 =
2(arctan x1
r + \cdot \cdot \cdot + arctan xn
r ) is
continuous. Thus A1A2 . . . An+1
is a closed simple polygonal line
if and only if f(r) = 360◦. But
such an r exists, since f(r) \to0
O
P1
P2
Pn−1
Pn
A1
A2
A3
An−1
An
An+1
when r \to\inftyand f(r) \to\inftywhen r \to0. This proves the second
direction of the lemma.
For n = 4k, the system (1) is solvable in positive reals if ai = i for i \equiv1, 2
(mod 4), ai = i + 1 for i \equiv3 and ai = i −1 for i \equiv0 (mod 4). Indeed, one
solution is given by xi = 1/2 for i \equiv1, xi = 3/2 for i \equiv3 and xi = i−3/2
for i \equiv0, 2 (mod 4).
Remark.
For n = 4k + 2 there is no such n-gon. In fact, solvability of
the system (1) implies a1 + a3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot = a2 + a4 + \cdot \cdot \cdot , while in the case
n = 4k + 2 the sum a1 + a2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an is odd.
