---
title: "IMO 1976 SL 1"
description: "Let ABC be a triangle with bisectors AA1, BB1, CC1 (A1 \in"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1976
type: "shortlist"
number: 1
origin: "BUL"
weight: 197600001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1976 SL 1

**Origin:** BUL

## Problem

Let ABC be a triangle with bisectors AA1, BB1, CC1 (A1 \in
BC, etc.) and M their common point. Consider the triangles MB1A,
MC1A, MC1B, MA1B, MA1C, MB1C, and their inscribed circles. Prove
that if four of these six inscribed circles have equal radii, then AB =
BC = CA.

## Solution

Let r denote the common inradius. Some two of the four triangles with
the inradii \rho have cross angles at M: Suppose these are \triangleAMB1 and
\triangleBMA1. We shall show that \triangleAMB1 ∼= \triangleBMA1. Indeed, the altitudes
of these two triangles are both equal to r, the inradius of \triangleABC, and
their interior angles at M are equal to some angle ϕ. If P is the point of
tangency of the incircle of \triangleA1MB with MB, then r
\rho = A1M+BM+A1B
A1B
,
which also implies
r−2\rho
\rho
=
A1M+BM−A1B
A1B
=
2MP
A1B =
2r cot(ϕ/2)
A1B
. Since
similarly
r−2\rho
\rho
=
2r cot(ϕ/2)
B1A
, we obtain A1B = B1A and consequently
\triangleAMB1 ∼= \triangleBMA1. Thus \angleBAC = \angleABC and CC1 \perpAB. There are
two alternatives for the other two incircles:
(i) If the inradii of AMC1 and AMB1 are equal to r, it is easy to obtain
that \triangleAMC1 ∼= \triangleAMB1. Hence \angleAB1M = \angleAC1M = 90◦, and
\triangleABC is equilateral.
(ii) The inradii of AMB1 and CMB1 are equal to r. Put x = \angleMAC1 =
\angleMBC1. In this case ϕ = 2x and \angleB1MC = 90◦−x. Now we have
AB1
CB1 =
SAMB1
SCMB1 = AM+MB1+AB1
CM+MB1+CB1 = AM+MB1−AB1
CM+MB1−CB1 =
cot x
cot(45◦−x/2). On
the other hand, AB1
CB1 = AB
BC = 2 cos2x. Thus we have an equation for
x: tan (45◦−x/2) = 2 cos 2x tan x, or equivalently
2 tan

45◦−x

sin

45◦−x

cos

45◦−x

= 2 cos2x sin x.
Hence sin 3x−sin x = 2 sin2 
45◦−x

= 1−sin x, implying sin 3x = 1,
i.e., x = 30◦. Therefore \triangleABC is equilateral.
