---
title: "IMO 1976 SL 12"
description: "The polynomial 1976(x+x2+\cdot \cdot \cdot+xn) is decomposed into a sum"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1976
type: "shortlist"
number: 12
origin: "VIE"
weight: 197600012
draft: false
---

# IMO 1976 SL 12

**Origin:** VIE

## Problem

The polynomial 1976(x+x2+\cdot \cdot \cdot+xn) is decomposed into a sum
of polynomials of the form a1x + a2x2 + . . . + anxn, where a1, a2, \cdot \cdot \cdot , an
are distinct positive integers not greater than n. Find all values of n for
which such a decomposition is possible.

## Solution

Suppose the decomposition into k polynomials is possible. The sum of
coeﬃcients of each polynomial a1x + a2x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + anxn equals 1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot +
n = n(n + 1)/2 while the sum of coeﬃcients of 1976(x + x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn)
is 1976n. Hence we must have 1976n = kn(n + 1)/2, which reduces to
(n+1) | 3952 = 24\cdot13\cdot19. In other words, n is of the form n = 2\alpha13\beta19\gamma−1,
with 0 \leq\alpha \leq4, 0 \leq\beta \leq1, 0 \leq\gamma \leq1. We can immediately eliminate
the values n = 0 and n = 3951 that correspond to \alpha = \beta = \gamma = 0 and
\alpha = 4, \beta = \gamma = 1.
We claim that all other values n are permitted. There are two cases.
\alpha \leq3. In this case k = 3952/(n + 1) is even. The simple choice of the
polynomials P = x+2x2+\cdot \cdot \cdot+nxn and P ′ = nx+(n−1)x2+\cdot \cdot \cdot+xn
suﬃces, since k(P + P ′)/2 = 1976(x + x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn).
\alpha = 4. Then k is odd. Consider (k −3)/2 pairs (P, P ′) of the former case
and
P1 =
/
nx + (n −1)x3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + n+1
2 xn0
+
/ n−1
2 x2 + n−3
2 x4 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn−10
;
P2 =
/ n+1
2 x + n−1
2 x3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn0
+
/
nx2 + (n −1)x4 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + n+3
2 xn−10
.
Then P + P1 + P2 = 3(n + 1)(x + x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn)/2 and therefore
(k −3)(P + P ′)/2 + (P + P1 + P2) = 1976(x + x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn).
It follows that the desired decomposition is possible if and only if 1 < n <
3951 and n + 1 | 2 \cdot 1976.
