---
title: "IMO 1976 SL 5"
description: "Let a set of p equations be given,"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1976
type: "shortlist"
number: 5
origin: "NET"
weight: 197600005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1976 SL 5

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

Let a set of p equations be given,
a11x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + a1qxq = 0,
a21x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + a2qxq = 0,
...
ap1x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + apqxq = 0,
with coe’¼ācients aij satisfying aij = ŌłÆ1, 0, or +1 for all i = 1, . . . , p and
j = 1, . . . , q. Prove that if q = 2p, there exists a solution x1, . . . , xq of this
system such that all xj (j = 1, . . . , q) are integers satisfying |xj| \leqq and
xj ╠Ė= 0 for at least one value of j.

## Solution

Thus the perimeter attains its minimum for
AB = CD = 4.

(c) Let us assume w.l.o.g. that CD \leqAB. Then C lies inside \triangleBDAŌĆ▓
and hence BC + AD = BC + CAŌĆ▓ < BD + DAŌĆ▓. The maximal value
BD + DAŌĆ▓ of BC + AD is attained when C approaches D, making a
degenerate quadrangle.
4. The ’¼ürst few values are easily veri’¼üed to be 2rn + 2ŌłÆrn, where r0 = 0,
r1 = r2 = 1, r3 = 3, r4 = 5, r5 = 11, . . . . Let us put un = 2rn + 2ŌłÆrn (we
will show that rn exists and is integer for each n). A simple calculation
gives us un(u2
nŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ2) = 2rn+2rnŌłÆ1 +2ŌłÆrnŌłÆ2rnŌłÆ1 +2rnŌłÆ2rnŌłÆ1 +2ŌłÆrn+2rnŌłÆ1.
If an array qn, with q0 = 0 and q1 = 1, is set so as to satisfy the linear
recurrence qn+1 = qn +2qnŌłÆ1, then it also satis’¼ües qn ŌłÆ2qnŌłÆ1 = ŌłÆ(qnŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ
2qnŌłÆ2) = \cdot \cdot \cdot = (ŌłÆ1)nŌłÆ1(q1 ŌłÆ2q0) = (ŌłÆ1)nŌłÆ1. Assuming inductively up
to n ri = qi, the expression for un(u2
nŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ2) = un+1 + u1 reduces to
2qn+1 + 2ŌłÆqn+1 + u1. Therefore, rn+1 = qn+1. The solution to this linear
recurrence with r0 = 0, r1 = 1 is rn = qn = 2nŌłÆ(ŌłÆ1)n
, and since [un] = 2rn
for n \geq0, the result follows.
Remark. One could simply guess that un = 2rn +2ŌłÆrn for rn = 2nŌłÆ(ŌłÆ1)n
,
and then prove this result by induction.
5. If one substitutes an integer q-tuple (x1, . . . , xq) satisfying |xi| \leqp for all
i in an equation of the given system, the absolute value of the right-hand
member never exceeds pq. So for the right-hand member of the system
there are (2pq + 1)p possibilities There are (2p + 1)q possible q-tuples
(x1, . . . , xq). Since (2p + 1)q \geq(2pq + 1)p, there are at least two q-tuples
(y1, . . . , yq) and (z1, . . . , zq) giving the same right-hand members in the
given system. The di’¼Ćerence (x1, . . . , xq) = (y1 ŌłÆz1, . . . , yq ŌłÆzq) thus
satis’¼ües all the requirements of the problem.
