---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 1"
description: "A convex quadrilateral ABCD has perpendicular diagonals."
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 1
origin: "LUX"
weight: 199800001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 1

**Origin:** LUX

## Problem

A convex quadrilateral ABCD has perpendicular diagonals.
The perpendicular bisectors of AB and CD meet at a unique point P
inside ABCD. Prove that ABCD is cyclic if and only if triangles ABP
and CDP have equal areas.

## Solution

We begin with the following observation: Suppose that P lies in \triangleAEB,
where E is the intersection of AC and BD (the other cases are similar). Let
M, N be the feet of the perpendiculars from P to AC and BD respectively.
We have SABP = SABE −SAEP −SBEP = 1
2(AE \cdot BE −AE \cdot EN −BE \cdot
EM) = 1
2(AM \cdotBN −EM \cdotEN). Similarly, SCDP = 1
2(CM \cdotDN −EM \cdot
EN). Therefore, we obtain
SABP −SCDP = AM \cdot BN −CM \cdot DN
.
(1)
Now suppose that ABCD is cyclic.
Then P
is the circumcenter of
ABCD; hence M and N are the
midpoints of AC and BD. Hence
AM = CM and BN = DN; thus
(1) gives us SABP = SCDP .
On the other hand, suppose that
ABCD is not cyclic and let w.l.o.g.
A
B
C
D
E
P
M
N
PA = PB > PC = PD. Then we must have AM > CM and BN >
DN, and consequently by (1), SABP > SCDP . This proves the other
implication.
Second solution. Let F and G denote the midpoints of AB and CD, and
assume that P is on the same side of FG as B and C. Since PF \perpAB,
PG \perpCD, and \angleFEB = \angleABE, \angleGEC = \angleDCE, a direct computa-
tion yields \angleFPG = \angleFEG = 90◦+ \angleABE + \angleDCE.
Taking into account that SABP = 1
2AB \cdot FP = FE \cdot FP, we note that
SABP = SCDP is equivalent to FE \cdot FP = GE \cdot GP, i.e., to FE/EG =
GP/PF. But this last is equivalent to triangles EFG and PGF being
similar, which holds if and only if EFPG is a parallelogram. This last is
equivalent to \angleEFP = \angleEGP, or 2\angleABE = 2\angleDCE. Thus SABP =
SCDP is equivalent to ABCD being cyclic.
Remark.
The problems also allows an analytic solution, for example
putting the x and y axes along the diagonals AC and BD.
