---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 12"
description: "Let n \geqk \geq0 be integers. The numbers c(n, k) are deﬁned as"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 12
origin: "POL"
weight: 199800012
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 12

**Origin:** POL

## Problem

Let n \geqk \geq0 be integers. The numbers c(n, k) are deﬁned as
follows:
c(n, 0) = c(n, n) = 1
for all n \geq0;
c(n + 1, k) = 2kc(n, k) + c(n, k −1)
for n \geqk \geq1.
Prove that c(n, k) = c(n, n −k) for all n \geqk \geq0.

## Solution

The assertion is clear for n = 0. We shall prove the general case
by induction on n. Suppose that c(m, i) = c(m, m −i) for all i and
m \leqn. Then by the induction hypothesis and the recurrence formula
we have c(n + 1, k) = 2kc(n, k) + c(n, k −1) and c(n + 1, n + 1 −k) =
2n+1−kc(n, n + 1 −k) + c(n, n −k) = 2n+1−kc(n, k −1) + c(n, k). Thus it
remains only to show that
(2k −1)c(n, k) = (2n+1−k −1)c(n, k −1).
We prove this also by induction on n. By the induction hypothesis,
c(n −1, k) = 2n−k −1
2k −1 c(n −1, k −1)
and
c(n −1, k −2) =
2k−1 −1
2n+1−k −1c(n −1, k −1).
Using these formulas and the recurrence formula we obtain (2k−1)c(n, k)−
(2n+1−k −1)c(n, k −1) = (22k −2k)c(n −1, k) −(2n −3 \cdot 2k−1 + 1)c(n −
1, k −1) −(2n+1−k −1)c(n −1, k −2) = (2n −2k)c(n −1, k −1) −(2n −
3 \cdot 2k−1 + 1)c(n −1, k −1) −(2k−1 −1)c(n −1, k −1) = 0. This completes
the proof.
Second solution. The given recurrence formula resembles that of binomial
coeﬃcients, so it is natural to search for an explicit formula of the form
c(n, k) =
F (n)
F (k)F (n−k), where F(m) = f(1)f(2) \cdot \cdot \cdot f(m) (with F(0) = 1)
and f is a certain function from the natural numbers to the real numbers.
If there is such an f, then c(n, k) = c(n, n −k) follows immediately.
After substitution of the above relation, the recurrence equivalently re-
duces to f(n+1) = 2kf(n−k+1)+f(k). It is easy to see that f(m) = 2m−1
satisﬁes this relation.
Remark.
If we introduce the polynomial Pn(x) = n
k=0 c(n, k)xk, the
recurrence relation gives P0(x) = 1 and Pn+1(x) = xPn(x) + Pn(2x).
As a consequence of the problem, all polynomials in this sequence are
symmetric, i.e., Pn(x) = xnPn(x−1).
