---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 13"
description: "Determine the least possible value of f(1998), where f is a"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 13
origin: "BUL"
weight: 199800013
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 13

**Origin:** BUL

## Problem

Determine the least possible value of f(1998), where f is a
function from the set N of positive integers into itself such that for all
m, n \inN,
f(n2f(m)) = m[f(n)]2.

## Solution

Denote by F the set of functions considered. Let f
\inF, and let
f(1) = a. Putting n = 1 and m = 1 we obtain f(f(z)) = a2z and
f(az2) = f(z)2 for all z \inN. These equations, together with the original
one, imply f(x)2f(y)2 = f(x)2f(ay2) = f(x2f(f(ay2))) = f(x2a3y2) =
f(a(axy)2) = f(axy)2, or f(axy) = f(x)f(y) for all x, y \inN. Thus
f(ax) = af(x), and we conclude that
af(xy) = f(x)f(y)
for all x, y \inN.
(1)
We now prove that f(x) is divisible by a for each x \inN. In fact, we
inductively get that f(x)k = ak−1f(xk) is divisible by ak−1 for every k.
If p\alpha and p\beta are the exact powers of a prime p that divide f(x) and a
respectively, we deduce that k\alpha \geq(k −1)\beta for all k, so we must have
\alpha \geq\beta for any p. Therefore a | f(x).
Now we consider the function on natural numbers g(x) = f(x)/a. The
above relations imply
g(1) = 1,
g(xy) = g(x)g(y),
g(g(x)) = x
for all x, y \inN.
(2)
Since g \inF and g(x) \leqf(x) for all x, we may restrict attention to the
functions g only.
Clearly g is bijective. We observe that g maps a prime to a prime. Assume
to the contrary that g(p) = uv, u, v > 1. Then g(uv) = p, so either
g(u) = 1 and g(v) = 1. Thus either g(1) = u or g(1) = v, which is
impossible.
We return to the problem of determining the least possible value of
g(1998). Since g(1998) = g(2 \cdot 33 \cdot 37) = g(2) \cdot g(3)3 \cdot g(37), and g(2),
g(3), g(37) are distinct primes, g(1998) is not smaller than 23 \cdot 3 \cdot 5 = 120.
On the other hand, the value of 120 is attained for any function g satis-
fying (2) and g(2) = 3, g(3) = 2, g(5) = 37, g(37) = 5. Hence the answer
is 120.
