---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 2"
description: "Let ABCD be a cyclic quadrilateral. Let E and F be variable"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 2
origin: "POL"
weight: 199800002
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 2

**Origin:** POL

## Problem

Let ABCD be a cyclic quadrilateral. Let E and F be variable
points on the sides AB and CD, respectively, such that AE : EB = CF :
FD. Let P be the point on the segment EF such that PE : PF = AB :
CD. Prove that the ratio between the areas of triangles APD and BPC
does not depend on the choice of E and F.

## Solution

If AD and BC are parallel, then ABCD is an isosceles trapezoid with
AB = CD, so P is the midpoint of EF. Let M and N be the midpoints
of AB and CD. Then MN \parallelBC, and the distance d(E, MN) equals the
distance d(F, MN) because B and D are the same distance from MN and
EM/BM = FN/DN. It follows that the midpoint P of EF lies on MN,
and consequently SAPD : SBPC = AD : BC.
If AD and BC are not parallel, then they meet at some point Q. It is
plain that \triangleQAB ∼\triangleQCD, and since AE/AB = CF/CD, we also
deduce that \triangleQAE ∼\triangleQCF. Therefore \angleAQE = \angleCQF. Further, from
these similarities we obtain QE/QF = QA/QC = AB/CD = PE/PF,

which in turn means that QP is the internal bisector of \angleEQF. But since
\angleAQE = \angleCQF, this is also the internal bisector of \angleAQB. Hence P is
at equal distances from AD and BC, so again SAPD : SBPC = AD : BC.
Remark. The part AB \parallelCD could also be regarded as a limiting case of
the other part.
Second solution. Denote \lambda = AE
AB , AB = a, BC = b, CD = c, DA = d,
\angleDAB = \alpha, \angleABC = \beta. Since d(P, AD) = c\cdotd(E,AD)+a\cdotd(F,AD)
a+c
, we have
SAPD = cSEAD+aSF AD
a+c
= \lambdacSABD+(1−\lambda)aSACD
a+c
. Since SABD = 1
2ad sin \alpha
and SACD = 1
2cd sin \beta, we are led to SAPD = acd
a+c[\lambda sin \alpha + (1 −\lambda) sin \beta],
and analogously SBPC =
abc
a+c[\lambda sin \alpha + (1 −\lambda) sin \beta]. Thus we obtain
SAPD : SBPC = d : b.
