---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 22"
description: "A rectangular array of numbers is given. In each row and each"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 22
origin: "UKR"
weight: 199800022
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 22

**Origin:** UKR

## Problem

A rectangular array of numbers is given. In each row and each
column, the sum of all numbers is an integer. Prove that each nonintegral
number x in the array can be changed into either \lceilx\rceilor \lfloorx\rfloorso that the
row sums and column sums remain unchanged. (Note that \lceilx\rceilis the least
integer greater than or equal to x, while \lfloorx\rflooris the greatest integer less
than or equal to x.)

## Solution

We can obviously change each x into \lfloorx\rflooror \lceilx\rceilso that the column sums
remain unchanged. However, this does not necessarily match the row sums
as well, so let us consider the sum S of the absolute values of the changes
in the row sums. It is easily seen that S is even, and we want it to be 0.
A row may have a higher or lower sum than desired. Let us mark a cell
by −if its entry x was changed to \lfloorx\rfloor, and by + if it was changed to \lceilx\rceil
instead. We call a row R2 accessible from a row R1 if there is a column
C such that C \capR1 is marked + and C \capR2 is marked −. Note that a
column containing a + must contain a −as well, because column sums
are unchanged. Hence from each row with a higher sum we can access
another row.
Assume that the row sum in R1 is higher. If R1, R2, . . . , Rk is a sequence
of rows such that Ri+1 is accessible from Ri via some column Ci and such
that the row sum in Rk is lower, then by changing the signs in Ci \capRi
and Ci \capRi+1 (i = 1, 2, . . . , k −1) we decrease S by 2, leaving column
sums unchanged. We claim that such a sequence of rows always exists.
Let R be the union of all rows that are accessible from R1, directly or
indirectly; let R be the union of the remaining rows. We show that for any
column C, the sum in R \capC is not higher. If R \capC contains no +’s, then
this is clear. If R \capC contains a +, since the rows of R are not accessible,
the set R \capC contains no −’s. It follows that the sum in R \capC is not
lower, and since column sums are unchanged, we again come to the same
conclusion. Thus the total sum in R is not higher. Therefore, there is a
row in R with too low a sum, justifying our claim.
