---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 23"
description: "Let n be an integer greater than 2. A positive integer is said to be"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 23
origin: "BLR"
weight: 199800023
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 23

**Origin:** BLR

## Problem

Let n be an integer greater than 2. A positive integer is said to be
attainable if it is 1 or can be obtained from 1 by a sequence of operations
with the following properties:
(i) The ﬁrst operation is either addition or multiplication.
(ii) Thereafter, additions and multiplications are used alternately.
(iii) In each addition one can choose independently whether to add 2 or n.
(iv) In each multiplication, one can choose independently whether to mul-
tiply by 2 or by n.
A positive integer that cannot be so obtained is said to be unattainable.
(a) Prove that if n \geq9, there are inﬁnitely many unattainable positive
integers.
(b) Prove that if n = 3, all positive integers except 7 are attainable.

## Solution

(a) If n is even, then every odd integer is unattainable. Assume that n \geq9
is odd. Let a be obtained by addition from some b, and b from c by
multiplication. Then a is 2c + 2, 2c + n, nc + 2, or nc + n, and is in
every case congruent to 2c + 2 modulo n −2. In particular, if a \equiv−2
(mod n −2), then also b \equiv−4 and c \equiv−2 (mod n −2).
Now consider any a = kn(n−2)−2, where k is odd. If it is attainable,
but not divisible by 2 or n, it must have been obtained by addition.
Thus all predecessors of a are congruent to either −2 or −4 (mod
n −2), and none of them equals 1, a contradiction.
(b) Call an attainable number addy if the last operation is addition, and
multy if the last operation is multiplication. We prove the following
claims by simultaneous induction on k:
(1) n = 6k is both addy and multy;
(2) n = 6k + 1 is addy for k \geq2;
(3) n = 6k + 2 is addy for k \geq1;
(4) n = 6k + 3 is addy;
(5) n = 6k + 4 is multy for k \geq1;
(6) n = 6k + 5 is addy.
The cases k \leq1 are easily veriﬁed. For k \geq2, suppose all six state-
ments hold up to k −1.

Since 6k −3 is addy, 6k is multy.
Next, 6k−2 is multy, so both 6k = (6k−2)+2 and 6k+1 = (6k−2)+3
are addy.
Since 6k is multy, both 6k + 2 and 6k + 3 are addy.
Number 6k + 4 = 2 \cdot (3k + 2) is multy, because 3k + 2 is addy (being
either 6l + 2 or 6l + 5).
Finally, we have 6k + 5 = 3 \cdot (2k + 1) + 2. Since 2k + 1 is 6l + 1, 6l + 3,
or 6l + 5, it is addy except for 7. Hence 6k + 5 is addy except possibly
for 23. But 23 = ((1 \cdot 2 + 2) \cdot 2 + 2) \cdot 2 + 3 is also addy.
This completes the induction. Now 1 is given and 2 = 1 \cdot 2, 4 = 1 + 3.
It is easily checked that 7 is not attainable, and hence it is the only
unattainable number.
