---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 25"
description: 'Let U = {1, 2, . . ., n}, where n \geq3. A subset S of U is said to be'
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 25
origin: "NZL"
weight: 199800025
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 25

**Origin:** NZL

## Problem

Let U = {1, 2, . . ., n}, where n \geq3. A subset S of U is said to be
split by an arrangement of the elements of U if an element not in S occurs
in the arrangement somewhere between two elements of S. For example,
13542 splits {1, 2, 3} but not {3, 4, 5}. Prove that for any n −2 subsets
of U, each containing at least 2 and at most n −1 elements, there is an
arrangement of the elements of U that splits all of them.

## Solution

We use induction on n. For n = 3, we have a single two-element subset
{i, j} that is split by (i, k, j) (where k is the third element of U). Assume
that the result holds for some n \geq3, and consider a family F of n −1
proper subsets of U = {1, 2, . . ., n + 1}, each with at least 2 elements.
To continue the induction, we need an element a \inU that is contained in
all n-element subsets of F, but in at most one of the two-element subsets.
We claim that such an a exists. Let F contain k n-element subsets and
m 2-element subsets (k + m \leqn −1). The intersection of the n-element
subsets contains exactly n + 1 −k \geqm + 2 elements. On the other hand,
at most m elements belong to more than one 2-element subset, which
justiﬁes our claim.

Now let A be the 2-element subset that contains a, if it exists; otherwise,
let A be any subset from F containing a. Excluding a from all the subsets
from F \ {A}, we get at most n −2 subsets of U \ {a} with at least 2
and at most n −1 elements. By the inductive hypothesis, we can arrange
U \ {a} so that we split all the subsets of F except A. It remains to place
a, and we shall make a desired arrangement if we put it anywhere away
from A.
