---
title: "IMO 1998 SL 28"
description: "A solitaire game is played on an m \times n rectangular board, using"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1998
type: "shortlist"
number: 28
origin: "IRN"
weight: 199800028
draft: false
---

# IMO 1998 SL 28

**Origin:** IRN

## Problem

A solitaire game is played on an m \times n rectangular board, using
mn markers that are white on one side and black on the other. Initially,
each square of the board contains a marker with its white side up, except
for one corner square, which contains a marker with its black side up. In
each move, one can take away one marker with its black side up, but must
then turn over all markers that are in squares having an edge in common
with the square of the removed marker. Determine all pairs (m, n) of
positive integers such that all markers can be removed from the board.

## Solution

Let A be the number of markers with white side up, and B the number
of pairs of markers whose squares share a side.
We claim that A + B does not change its parity as the game progresses.
Suppose that in some move we remove a marker that has exactly k neigh-
bors, among them r with white side up (0 \leqr \leqk \leq4). Of course, this
marker has its black side up. When it is removed, the r white markers get
black side up, while the k −r black ones become white. Thus A changes
by k −2r. As for B, it decreases by k. It follows that A decreases by 2r
and preserves its parity, as claimed.
Initially, A = mn −1 and B = m(n −1) + n(m −1); hence A + B equals
3mn −m −n −1. If we succeed in removing all the markers, we end up
with A + B = 0. Hence 3mn −m −n −1 = (m −1)(n −1) + 2(mn −1)
must be even, or equivalently at least one of m and n is odd.
On the other hand, the game can be ﬁnished successfully if m or n is
odd. Assume that m is odd. As shown in the picture, we can arrive at
the position (1) in m moves; with m+1
moves we reduce it to the position
(1 1
2), and with the next m−1
moves to the position (2). We continue until
we empty all the columns.
•
◦◦◦
◦◦◦
◦◦◦
◦◦◦
◦◦◦
◦◦◦
◦◦
−\to
•••
••••
◦◦◦
◦◦◦◦
−\to
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
◦
◦
◦
−\to
•••
••••
(0)
(1)
(1 1
2)
(2)
m
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
