---
title: "IMO 1983 SL 1"
description: "The localities P1, P2, . . . , P1983 are served by ten international"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1983
type: "shortlist"
number: 1
origin: "AUS"
weight: 198300001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1983 SL 1

**Origin:** AUS

## Problem

The localities P1, P2, . . . , P1983 are served by ten international
airlines A1, A2, . . . , A10. It is noticed that there is direct service (without
stops) between any two of these localities and that all airline schedules
oﬀer round-trip ﬂights. Prove that at least one of the airlines can oﬀer a
round trip with an odd number of landings.

## Solution

Suppose that there are n airlines A1, . . . , An and N > 2n cities. We shall
prove that there is a round trip by at least one Ai containing an odd
number of stops.
For n = 1 the statement is trivial, since one airline serves at least 3 cities
and hence P1P2P3P1 is a round trip with 3 landings. We use induction
on n, and assume that n > 1. Suppose the contrary, that all round trips
by An consist of an even number of stops. Then we can separate the
cities into two nonempty classes Q = {Q1, . . . , Qr} and R = {R1, . . . , Rs}
(where r+s = N), so that each ﬂight by An runs between a Q-city and an
R-city. (Indeed, take any city Q1 served by An; include each city linked to
Q1 by An in R, then include in Q each city linked by An to any R-city, etc.
Since all round trips are even, no contradiction can arise.) At least one of
r, s is larger than 2n−1, say r > 2n−1. But, only A1, . . . , An−1 run between
cities in {Q1, . . . , Qr}; hence by the induction hypothesis at least one of
them ﬂies a round trip with an odd number of landings, a contradiction.
It only remains to notice that for n = 10, 2n = 1024 < 1983.
Remark.
If there are N = 2n cities, there is a schedule with n airlines
that contain no odd round trip by any of the airlines. Let the cities be Pk,
k = 0, . . . , 2n −1, and write k in the binary system as an n-digit number
a1 . . . an (e.g., 1 = (0 . . . 001)2). Link Pk and Pl by Ai if the ith digits k
and l are distinct but the ﬁrst i −1 digits are the same. All round trips
under Ai are even, since the ith digit alternates.
