---
title: "IMO 1988 SL 1"
description: "An integer sequence is de’¼üned by"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1988
type: "shortlist"
number: 1
origin: "BUL"
weight: 198800001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1988 SL 1

**Origin:** BUL

## Problem

An integer sequence is de’¼üned by
an = 2anŌłÆ1 + anŌłÆ2
(n > 1),
a0 = 0, a1 = 1.
Prove that 2k divides an if and only if 2k divides n.

## Solution

Assume that p and q are real and b0, b1, b2, . . . is a sequence such that
bn = pbnŌłÆ1 + qbnŌłÆ2 for all n > 1. From the equalities bn = pbnŌłÆ1 + qbnŌłÆ2,
bn+1 = pbn + qbnŌłÆ1, bn+2 = pbn+1 + qbn, eliminating bn+1 and bnŌłÆ1 we
obtain that bn+2 = (p2 +2q)bn ŌłÆq2bnŌłÆ2. So the sequence b0, b2, b4, . . . has
the property
b2n = Pb2nŌłÆ2 + Qb2nŌłÆ4,
P = p2 + 2q, Q = ŌłÆq2.
(1)
We shall solve the problem by induction. The sequence an has p = 2,
q = 1, and hence P = 6, Q = ŌłÆ1.
Let k = 1. Then a0 = 0, a1 = 1, and an is of the same parity as anŌłÆ2; i.e.,
it is even if and only if n is even.
Let k \geq1. We assume that for n = 2km, the numbers an are divisible
by 2k, but divisible by 2k+1 if and only if m is even. We assume also
that the sequence c0, c1, . . . , with cm = am\cdot2k, satis’¼ües the condition cn =
pcnŌłÆ1ŌłÆcnŌłÆ2, where p \equiv2 (mod 4) (for k = 1 it is true). We shall prove the
same statement for k + 1. According to (1), c2n = Pc2nŌłÆ2 ŌłÆc2nŌłÆ4, where
P = p2 ŌłÆ2. Obviously P \equiv2 (mod 4). Since P = 4s + 2 for some integer
s, and c2n = 2k+1d2n, c0 = 0, c1 \equiv2k (mod 2k+1), and c2 = pc1 \equiv2k+1
(mod 2k+2), we have
c2n = (4s + 2)2k+1d2nŌłÆ2 ŌłÆc2nŌłÆ4 \equivc2nŌłÆ4 (mod 2k+2),
i.e., 0 \equivc0 \equivc4 \equivc8 \equiv\cdot \cdot \cdot and 2k+1 \equivc2 \equivc6 \equiv\cdot \cdot \cdot (mod 2k+2), which
proves the statement.
Second solution. The recursion is solved by
an =
\sqrt

(1 +
\sqrt
2)n ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ
\sqrt
2)n
=
n

+ 2
n

+ 22
n

+ \cdot \cdot \cdot .
Let n = 2km with m odd; then for p > 0 the summand
2p

n
2p + 1

= 2k+pm(n ŌłÆ1) . . . (n ŌłÆ2p)
(2p + 1)!
= 2k+p
m
2p + 1
n ŌłÆ1
2p

is divisible by 2k+p, because the denominator 2p + 1 is odd. Hence
an = n +

p>0
2p

n
2p + 1

= 2km + 2k+1N
for some integer N, so that an is exactly divisible by 2k.
Third solution. It can be proven by induction that a2n = 2an(an +an+1).
The required result follows easily, again by induction on k.
