---
title: "IMO 1988 SL 10"
description: 'Let N = {1, 2, . . ., n}, n \geq2. A collection F = {A1, . . . , At}'
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1988
type: "shortlist"
number: 10
origin: "GDR"
weight: 198800010
draft: false
---

# IMO 1988 SL 10

**Origin:** GDR

## Problem

Let N = {1, 2, . . ., n}, n \geq2. A collection F = {A1, . . . , At}
of subsets Ai \subseteqN, i = 1, . . . , t, is said to be separating if for every pair
{x, y} \subseteqN, there is a set Ai \inF such that Ai \cap{x, y} contains just one
element. A collection F is said to be covering if every element of N is
contained in at least one set Ai \inF. What is the smallest value f(n) of t
such that there is a set F = {A1, . . . , At} that is simultaneously separating
and covering?

## Solution

We claim that if the family {A1, . . . , At} separates the n-set N, then
2t \geqn. The proof goes by induction. The case t = 1 is clear, so suppose
that the claim holds for t −1. Since At does not separate elements of
its own or its complement, it follows that {A1, . . . , At−1} is separating for
both At and N∖At, so that |At|, |N∖At| \leq2t−1. Then |N| \leq2\cdot2t−1 = 2t,
as claimed.
Also, if the set N with N = 2t is separated by {A1, . . . , At}, then (pre-
cisely) one element of N is not covered. To show this, we again use in-
duction. This is trivial for t = 1, so let t \geq1. Since A1, . . . , At−1 separate
both At and N ∖At, N ∖At must have exactly 2t−1 elements, and thus
one of its elements is not covered by A1, . . . , At−1, and neither is covered
by At. We conclude that a separating and covering family of t subsets can
exist only if n \leq2t −1.
We now construct such subsets for the set N if 2t−1 \leqn \leq2t −1, t \geq1.
For t = 1, put A1 = {1}. In the step from t to t+1, let N = N ′\cupN ′′\cup{y},
where |N ′|, |N ′′| \leq2t−1; let A′
1, . . . , A′
t be subsets covering and separating
N ′ and A′′
1, . . . , A′′
t such subsets for N ′′. Then the subsets Ai = A′
i \cupA′′
i
(i = 1, . . . , t) and At+1 = N ′′ \cup{y} obviously separate and cover N.
The answer: t = [log2 n] + 1.
Second solution. Suppose that the sets A1, . . . , At cover and separate N.
Label each element x \inN with a string of (x1x2 . . . xt) of 0’s and 1’s,
where xi is 1 when x \inAi, 0 otherwise. Since the Ai’s separate, these
strings are distinct; since they cover, the string (00 . . . 0) does not occur.

Hence n \leq2t −1. Conversely, for 2t−1 \leqn < 2t, represent the elements of
N in base 2 as strings of 0’s and 1’s of length t. For 1 \leqi \leqt, take Ai to
be the set of numbers in N whose binary string has a 1 in the ith place.
These sets clearly cover and separate.
