---
title: "IMO 1988 SL 11"
description: "The lock on a safe consists of three wheels, each of which may"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1988
type: "shortlist"
number: 11
origin: "GDR"
weight: 198800011
draft: false
---

# IMO 1988 SL 11

**Origin:** GDR

## Problem

The lock on a safe consists of three wheels, each of which may
be set in eight diﬀerent positions. Due to a defect in the safe mechanism
the door will open if any two of the three wheels are in the correct position.
What is the smallest number of combinations that must be tried if one
is to guarantee being able to open the safe (assuming that the “right
combination” is not known)?

## Solution

The answer is 32. Write the combinations as triples k = (x, y, z), 0 \leq
x, y, z \leq7. Deﬁne the sets K1 = {(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1), (1, 1, 1)},
K2 = {(2, 0, 0), (0, 2, 0), (0, 0, 2), (2, 2, 2)}, K3 = {(0, 0, 0), (4, 4, 4)}, and
K = {k = k1 + k2 + k3 | ki \inKi, i = 1, 2, 3}. There are 32 combinations
in K. We shall prove that these combinations will open the safe in every
case.
Let t = (a, b, c) be the right combination. Set k3 = (0, 0, 0) if at least
two of a, b, c are less than 4, and k3 = (4, 4, 4) otherwise. In either case,
the diﬀerence t −k3 contains two nonnegative elements not greater than
3. Choosing a suitable k2 we can achieve that t −k3 −k2 contains two
elements that are 0, 1. So, there exists k1 such that t−k3 −k2 −k1 = t−k
contains two zeros, for k \inK. This proves that 32 is suﬃcient.
Suppose that K is a set of at most 31 combinations. We say that k \inK
covers the combination k1 if k and k1 diﬀer in at most one position. One
of the eight sets Mi = {(i, y, z) | 0 \leqy, z \leq7}, i = 0, 1, . . . , 7, contains
at most three elements of K. Suppose w.l.o.g. that this is M0. Further,
among the eight sets Nj = {(0, j, z) | 0 \leqz \leq7}, j = 0, . . . , 7, there are at
least ﬁve, say w.l.o.g. N0, . . . , N4, not containing any of the combinations
from K.
Of the 40 elements of the set N = {(0, y, z) | 0 \leqy \leq4, 0 \leqz \leq7}, at
most 5\cdot3 = 15 are covered by K\capM0, and at least 25 aren’t. Consequently,
the intersection of K with L = {(x, y, z) | 1 \leqx \leq7, 0 \leqy \leq4, 0 \leqz \leq7}
contains at least 25 elements. So K has at most 31 −25 = 6 elements in
the set P = {(x, y, z) | 0 \leqx \leq7, 5 \leqy \leq7, 0 \leqz \leq7}. This implies
that for some j \in{5, 6, 7}, say w.l.o.g. j = 7, K contains at most two
elements in Qj = {(x, y, z) | 0 \leqx, z \leq7, y = j}; denote them by l1, l2.
Of the 64 elements of Q7, at most 30 are covered by l1 and l2. But then
there remain 34 uncovered elements, which must be covered by diﬀerent
elements of K ∖Q7, having itself less at most 29 elements. Contradiction.
