---
title: "IMO 1988 SL 17"
description: "In the convex pentagon ABCDE, the sides BC, CD, DE have"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1988
type: "shortlist"
number: 17
origin: "ISR"
weight: 198800017
draft: false
---

# IMO 1988 SL 17

**Origin:** ISR

## Problem

In the convex pentagon ABCDE, the sides BC, CD, DE have
the same length. Moreover, each diagonal of the pentagon is parallel to
a side (AC is parallel to DE, BD is parallel to AE, etc.). Prove that
ABCDE is a regular pentagon.

## Solution

Let AC and AD meet BE in R, S, respectively. Then by the conditions
of the problem,
\angleAEB = \angleEBD = \angleBDC = \angleDBC = \angleADB = \angleEAD = \alpha,
\angleABE = \angleBEC = \angleECD = \angleCED = \angleACE = \angleBAC = \beta,
\angleBCA = \angleCAD = \angleADE = \gamma.
Since \angleSAE = \angleSEA, it follows that AS = SE, and analogously BR =
RA. But BSDC and REDC are parallelograms; hence BS = CD = RE,
giving us BR = SE and AR = AS. Then also AC = AD, because RS \parallel
CD. We deduce that 2\beta = \angleACD = \angleADC = 2\alpha, i.e., \alpha = \beta.
It will be suﬃcient to show that \alpha = \gamma, since that will imply \alpha = \beta = \gamma =
36◦. We have that the sum of the interior angles of ACD is 4\alpha+\gamma = 180◦.
We have
sin \gamma
sin \alpha = AE
DE = AE
CD = AE
RE = sin(2\alpha + \gamma)
sin(\alpha + \gamma) ,
i.e., cos \alpha−cos(\alpha+2\gamma) = 2 sin \gamma sin(\alpha+\gamma) = 2 sin \alpha sin(2\alpha+\gamma) = cos(\alpha+
\gamma) −cos(3\alpha + \gamma). From 4\alpha + \gamma = 180◦we obtain −cos(3\alpha + \gamma) = cos \alpha.
Hence
cos(\alpha + \gamma) + cos(\alpha + 2\gamma) = 2 cos \gamma
2 cos 2\alpha + 3\gamma
= 0,
so that 2\alpha + 3\gamma = 180◦. It follows that \alpha = \gamma.
Second solution.
We have \angleBEC = \angleECD = \angleDEC = \angleECA =
\angleCAB, and hence the trapezoid BAEC is cyclic; consequently, AE =
BC. Similarly AB = ED, and ABCD is cyclic as well. Thus ABCDE is
cyclic and has all sides equal; i.e., it is regular.
