---
title: "IMO 1988 SL 29"
description: "A number of signal lights are equally spaced along a one-way"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1988
type: "shortlist"
number: 29
origin: "USA"
weight: 198800029
draft: false
---

# IMO 1988 SL 29

**Origin:** USA

## Problem

A number of signal lights are equally spaced along a one-way
railroad track, labeled in order 1, 2, . . ., N (N \geq2). As a safety rule, a
train is not allowed to pass a signal if any other train is in motion on the
length of track between it and the following signal. However, there is no
limit to the number of trains that can be parked motionless at a signal,
one behind the other. (Assume that the trains have zero length.)
A series of K freight trains must be driven from Signal 1 to Signal N.
Each train travels at a distinct but constant speed (i.e., the speed is ﬁxed
and diﬀerent from that of each of the other trains) at all times when it is
not blocked by the safety rule. Show that regardless of the order in which
the trains are arranged, the same time will elapse between the ﬁrst train’s
departure from Signal 1 and the last train’s arrival at Signal N.

## Solution

Let the ﬁrst train start from Signal 1 at time 0, and let tj be the time
it takes for the jth train in the series to travel from one signal to the
next. By induction on k, we show that Train k arrives at signal n at time
sk + (n −2)mk, where sk = t1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + tk and mk = maxj=1,...,k tj.
For k = 1 the statement is clear. We now suppose that it is true for k
trains and for every n, and add a (k + 1)th train behind the others at
Signal 1. There are two cases to consider:
(i) tk+1 \geqmk, i.e., mk+1 = tk+1. Then Train k + 1 leaves Signal 1 when
all the others reach Signal 2, which by the induction happens at time
sk. Since by the induction hypothesis Train k arrives at Signal i+1 at
time sk+(i−1)mk \leqsk+(i−1)tk+1, Train k+1 is never forced to stop.
The journey ﬁnishes at time sk + (n −1)tk+1 = sk+1 + (n −2)mk+1.
(ii) tk+1 < mk, i.e., mk+1 = mk. Train k + 1 leaves Signal 1 at time
sk, and reaches Signal 2 at time sk + tk+1, but must wait there until
all the other trains get to Signal 3, i.e., until time sk + mk (by the
induction hypothesis). So it reaches Signal 3 only at time sk + mk +
tk+1. Similarly, it gets to Signal 4 at time sk + 2mk + tk+1, etc. Thus
the entire schedule ﬁnishes at time sk + (n −2)mk + tk+1 = sk+1 +
(n −2)mk+1.
