---
title: "IMO 1988 SL 5"
description: "Let n be an even positive integer. Let A1, A2, . . . , An+1 be"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1988
type: "shortlist"
number: 5
origin: "CZS"
weight: 198800005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1988 SL 5

**Origin:** CZS

## Problem

Let n be an even positive integer. Let A1, A2, . . . , An+1 be
sets having n elements each such that any two of them have exactly one
element in common while every element of their union belongs to at least
two of the given sets. For which n can one assign to every element of the
union one of the numbers 0 and 1 in such a manner that each of the sets
has exactly n/2 zeros?

## Solution

Let n = 2k and let A = {A1, . . . , A2k+1} denote the family of sets with
the desired properties. Since every element of their union B belongs to
at least two sets of A, it follows that Aj = %
i̸=j Ai \capAj holds for every
1 \leqj \leq2k+1. Since each intersection in the sum has at most one element
and Aj has 2k elements, it follows that every element of Aj, i.e., in general
of B, is a member of exactly two sets.
We now prove that k is even, assuming that the marking described in
the problem exists. We have already shown that for every two indices
1 \leqj \leq2k + 1 and i ̸= j there exists a unique element contained in both
Ai and Aj. On a 2k \times 2k matrix let us mark in the ith column and jth
row for i ̸= j the number that was joined to the element of B in Ai \capAj.
In the ith row and column let us mark the number of the element of B in
Ai \capA2k+1. In each row from the conditions of the marking there must be
an even number of zeros. Hence, the total number of zeros in the matrix is
even. The matrix is symmetric with respect to its main diagonal; hence it
has an even number of zeros outside its main diagonal. Hence, the number
of zeros on the main diagonal must also be even and this number equals
the number of elements in A2k+1 that are marked with 0, which is k.
Hence k must be even.

For even k we note that the dimensions of a 2k \times 2k matrix are divisible
by 4. Tiling the entire matrix with the 4 \times 4 submatrix
Q =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
0 1 0 1
1 0 1 0
0 1 1 0
1 0 0 1
⎤
⎥⎥⎦,
we obtain a marking that indeed satisﬁes all the conditions of the problem;
hence we have shown that the marking is possible if and only if k is even.
