---
title: "IMO 1978 SL 13"
description: "Given any point P in the interior of a sphere with ra-"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1978
type: "shortlist"
number: 13
origin: "USA"
weight: 197800013
draft: false
---

# IMO 1978 SL 13

**Origin:** USA

## Problem

Given any point P in the interior of a sphere with ra-
dius R, three mutually perpendicular segments PA, PB, PC are drawn
terminating on the sphere and having one common vertex in P. Con-
sider the rectangular parallelepiped of which PA, PB, PC are coterminal
edges. Find the locus of the point Q that is diagonally opposite P in the
parallelepiped when P and the sphere are ﬁxed.

## Solution

Lemma. If MNPQ is a rectangle and O any point in space, then OM 2 +
OP 2 = ON 2 + OQ2.
Proof.
Let O1 be the projection of O onto MNPQ, and m, n, p, q de-
note the distances of O1 from MN, NP, PQ, QM, respectively. Then
OM 2 = OO2
1 +q2+m2, ON 2 = OO2
1 +m2+n2, OP 2 = OO2
1 +n2+p2,
OQ2 = OO2
1 + p2 + q2, and the lemma follows immediately.
Now we return to the problem. Let O be the center of the given sphere
S, and X the point opposite P in the face of the parallelepiped through
P, A, B. By the lemma, we have OP 2 + OQ2 = OC2 + OX2 and OP 2 +
OX2 = OA2 + OB2. Hence 2OP 2 + OQ2 = OA2 + OB2 + OC2 = 3R2,
i.e. OQ =
\sqrt
3R2 −OP 2 > R.
We claim that the locus of Q is the whole sphere (O,
\sqrt
3R2 −OP 2).
Choose any point Q on this sphere. Since OQ > R > OP, the sphere

with diameter PQ intersects S on a circle. Let C be an arbitrary point
on this circle, and X the point opposite C in the rectangle PCQX. By
the lemma, OP 2 + OQ2 = OC2 + OX2, hence OX2 = 2R2 −OP 2 > R2.
The plane passing through P and perpendicular to PC intersects S in
a circle \gamma; both P, X belong to this plane, P being inside and X out-
side the circle, so that the circle with diameter PX intersects \gamma at some
point B. Finally, we choose A to be the point opposite B in the rectangle
PBXA: we deduce that OA2 + OB2 = OP 2 + OX2, and consequently
A \inS. By the construction, there is a rectangular parallelepiped through
P, A, B, C, X, Q.
