---
title: "IMO 1978 SL 14"
description: "Prove that it is possible to place 2n(2n + 1) parallelepipedic"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1978
type: "shortlist"
number: 14
origin: "VIE"
weight: 197800014
draft: false
---

# IMO 1978 SL 14

**Origin:** VIE

## Problem

Prove that it is possible to place 2n(2n + 1) parallelepipedic
(rectangular) pieces of soap of dimensions 1 \times 2 \times (n + 1) in a cubic box
with edge 2n + 1 if and only if n is even or n = 1.
Remark. It is assumed that the edges of the pieces of soap are parallel to
the edges of the box.

## Solution

We label the cells of the cube by (a1, a2, a3), ai \in{1, 2, . . ., 2n + 1}, in
a natural way: for example, as Cartesian coordinates of centers of the
cells ((1, 1, 1) is one corner, etc.). Notice that there should be (2n + 1)3 −
2n(2n + 1) \cdot 2(n + 1) = 2n + 1 void cells, i.e., those not covered by any
piece of soap.
n = 1. In this case, six pieces of soap 1\times2\times2 can be placed on the following
positions: [(1, 1, 1), (2, 2, 1)], [(3, 1, 1), (3, 2, 2)], [(2, 3, 1), (3, 3, 2)] and
the symmetric ones with respect to the center of the box. (Here [A, B]
denotes the rectangle with opposite corners at A, B.)
n is even. Each of the 2n + 1 planes Pk = {(a1, a2, k) | ai = 1, . . . , 2n + 1}
can receive 2n pieces of soap: In fact, Pk can be partitioned into four
n \times (n + 1) rectangles at the corners and the central cell, while an
n \times (n + 1) rectangle can receive n/2 pieces of soap.
n is odd, n > 1. Let us color a cell (a1, a2, a3) blue, red, or yellow if exactly
three, two or one ai respectively is equal to n + 1. Thus there are 1
blue, 6n red, and 12n2 yellow cells. We notice that each piece of soap
must contain at least one colored cell (because 2(n+1) > 2n+1). Also,
every piece of soap contains an even number (actually, 1 \cdot 2, 1(n + 1),
or 2(n + 1)) of cells in Pk. On the other hand, 2n + 1 cells are void,
i.e., one in each plane.
There are several cases for a piece of soap S:
(i) S consists of 1 blue, n + 1 red and n yellow cells;
(ii) S consists of 2 red and 2n yellow cells (and no blue cells);
(iii) S contains 1 red cell, n+1 yellow cells, and the are rest uncolored;
(iv) S contains 2 yellow cells and no blue or red ones.
From the descriptions of the last three cases, we can deduce that if S
contains r red cells and no blue, then it contains exactly 2 + (n −1)r
red ones.
(∗)
Now, let B1, . . . , Bk be all boxes put in the cube, with a possible
exception for the one covering the blue cell: thus k = 2n(2n + 1) if
the blue cell is void, or k = 2n(2n + 1) −1 otherwise. Let ri and yi
respectively be the numbers of red and yellow cells inside Bi. By (∗)
we have y1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + yk = 2k + (n −1)(r1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + rk). If the blue cell
is void, then r1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + rk = 6n and consequently y1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + yk =

4n(2n+1)+6n(n−1) = 14n2 −2n, which is impossible because there
are only 12n2 < 14n2−2n yellow cells. Otherwise, r1+\cdot \cdot \cdot+rk \geq5n−2
(because n + 1 red cells are covered by the box containing the blue
cell, and one can be void) and consequently y1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + yk \geq4n(2n +
1)−2+(n−1)(5n−2) = 13n2−3n; since there are n more yellow cells
in the box containing the blue one, this counts for 13n2 −2n > 12n2
(n \geq3), again impossible.
Remark.
The following solution of the case n odd is simpler, but does
not work for n = 3. For k = 1, 2, 3, let mk be the number of pieces whose
long sides are perpendicular to the plane \pik(ak = n + 1). Each of these
mk pieces covers exactly 2 cells of \pik, while any other piece covers n + 1,
2(n + 1), or none. It follows that 4n2 + 4n −2mk is divisible by n + 1, and
so is 2mk. This further implies that 2m1 + 2m2 + 2m3 = 4n(2n + 1) is a
multiple of n + 1, which is impossible for each odd n except n = 1 and
n = 3.
