---
title: "IMO 1978 SL 2"
description: "Two identically oriented equilateral triangles, ABC with center"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1978
type: "shortlist"
number: 2
origin: "BUL"
weight: 197800002
draft: false
---

# IMO 1978 SL 2

**Origin:** BUL

## Problem

Two identically oriented equilateral triangles, ABC with center
S and A′B′C, are given in the plane. We also have A′ ̸= S and B′ ̸= S.
If M is the midpoint of A′B and N the midpoint of AB′, prove that the
triangles SB′M and SA′N are similar.

## Solution

Consider the transformation \varphi of the plane deﬁned as the homothety H
with center B and coeﬃcient 2 followed by the rotation R about the center
O through an angle of 60◦. Being direct, this mapping
must be a rotational homothety. We
also see that H maps S into the
point symmetric to S with respect
to OA, and R takes it back to S.
Hence S is a ﬁxed point, and is
consequently also the center of \varphi.
Therefore \varphi is the rotational homo-
thety about S with the angle 60◦
O
A
B
S
A′
B′
M
N
and coeﬃcient 2. (In fact, this could also be seen from the fact that \varphi
preserves angles of triangles and maps the segment SR onto SB, where
R is the midpoint of AB.)
Since \varphi(M) = B′, we conclude that \angleMSB′ = 60◦and SB′/SM = 2.
Similarly, \angleNSA′ = 60◦and SA′/SN = 2, so triangles MSB′ and NSA′
are indeed similar.
Second solution. Probably the simplest way here is using complex num-
bers. Put the origin at O and complex numbers a, a′ at points A, A′, and
denote the primitive sixth root of 1 by \omega. Then the numbers at B, B′,
S and N are \omegaa, \omegaa′, (a + \omegaa)/3, and (a + \omegaa′)/2 respectively. Now it
is easy to verify that (n −s) = \omega(a′ −s)/2, i.e., that \angleNSA′ = 60◦and
SA′/SN = 2.
