---
title: "IMO 1987 SL 10"
description: "Let S1 and S2 be two spheres with distinct radii that touch"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1987
type: "shortlist"
number: 10
origin: "ICE"
weight: 198700010
draft: false
---

# IMO 1987 SL 10

**Origin:** ICE

## Problem

Let S1 and S2 be two spheres with distinct radii that touch
externally. The spheres lie inside a cone C, and each sphere touches the
cone in a full circle. Inside the cone there are n additional solid spheres
arranged in a ring in such a way that each solid sphere touches the cone
C, both of the spheres S1 and S2 externally, as well as the two neighboring
solid spheres. What are the possible values of n?

## Solution

Denote by r, R (take w.l.o.g. r < R)
the radii and by A, B the centers
of the spheres S1, S2 respectively.
Let s be the common radius of the
spheres in the ring, C the center of
one of them, say S, and D the foot
of the perpendicular from C to AB.
The centers of the spheres in the
ring form a regular n-gon with cen-
ter D, and thus sin(\pi/n) = s/CD.
Using Heron’s formula on the trian-
gle ABC, we obtain (r+R)2CD2 =
4rRs(r + R + s), and hence
A
B
E2
E1
C
E
D
R
r
s
v
sin2 \pi
n =
s2
CD2 =
(r + R)2s
4(r + R + s)rR.
(1)
Choosing the unit of length so that r + R = 2, for simplicity of writing,
we write (1) as 1/sin2(\pi/n) = rR (1 + 2/s) . Let now v be half the angle
at the top of the cone. Then clearly R −r = (R + r) sin v = 2 sin v, giving
us R = 1 + sin v, r = 1 −sin v. It follows that
sin2 \pi
n
=

1 + 2
s

cos2 v.
(2)

We need to express s as a function of R and r. Let E1, E2, E be collinear
points of tangency of S1, S2, and S with the cone. Obviously, E1E2 =
E1E + E2E, i.e., 2\sqrtrs + 2
\sqrt
Rs = 2
\sqrt
Rr = (R + r) cos v = 2 cosv. Hence,
cos2 v = s(
\sqrt
R + \sqrtr)2 = s(R + r + 2
\sqrt
Rr) = s(2 + 2 cosv).
Substituting this into (2), we obtain 2 + cosv = 1/sin(\pi/n). Therefore
1/3 < sin(\pi/n) < 1/2, and we conclude that the possible values for n are
7, 8, and 9.
