---
title: "IMO 1987 SL 16"
description: "Let S be a set of n elements. We denote the number of all"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1987
type: "shortlist"
number: 16
origin: "FRG"
weight: 198700016
draft: false
---

# IMO 1987 SL 16

**Origin:** FRG

## Problem

Let S be a set of n elements. We denote the number of all
permutations of S that have exactly k ﬁxed points by pn(k). Prove:
(a) n
k=0 kpn(k) = n!;
(b) n
k=0(k −1)2pn(k) = n!.

## Solution

We assume that S = {1, 2, . . ., n}, and use the obvious fact
n

k=0
pn(k) = n!
(0)
(a) To each permutation \pi of S we assign an n-vector (e1, e2, . . . , en),
where ei is 1 if i is a ﬁxed point of \pi, and 0 otherwise. Since exactly
pn(k) of the assigned vectors contain exactly k “1”s, the considered
sum n
k=0 kpn(k) counts all the “1”s occurring in all the n! assigned
vectors. But for each i, 1 \leqi \leqn, there are exactly (n −1)! per-
mutations that ﬁx i; i.e., exactly (n −1)! of the vectors have ei = 1.
Therefore the total number of “1”s is n \cdot (n −1)! = n!, implying
n

k=0
kpn(k) = n!.
(1)
(b) In this case, to each permutation \pi of S we assign a vector (d1, . . . , dn)
instead, with di = k if i is a ﬁxed point of \pi, and di = 0 otherwise,
where k is the number of ﬁxed points of \pi.
Let us count the sum Z of all components di for all the n! permuta-
tions. There are pn(k) such vectors with exactly k components equal
to k, and sums of components equal to k2. Thus, Z = n
k=0 k2pn(k).
On the other hand, we may ﬁrst calculate the sum of all components di
for ﬁxed i. In fact, the value di = k > 0 will occur exactly pn−1(k −1)
times, so that the sum of the di’s is n
k=1 kpn−1(k −1) = n−1
k=0(k +
1)pn−1(k) = 2(n −1)!. Summation over i yields
Z = n
k=0 k2pn(k) = 2n!.
(2)
From (0), (1), and (2), we conclude that
n

k=0
(k −1)2pn(k) =
n

k=0
k2pn(k) −2
n

k=0
kpn(k) +
n

k=0
pn(k) = n!.
Remark. Only the ﬁrst part of this problem was given on the IMO.
