---
title: "IMO 1987 SL 4"
description: "Let ABCDEFGH be a parallelepiped with AE\parallelBF\parallelCG\parallelDH."
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1987
type: "shortlist"
number: 4
origin: "FRA"
weight: 198700004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1987 SL 4

**Origin:** FRA

## Problem

Let ABCDEFGH be a parallelepiped with AE\parallelBF\parallelCG\parallelDH.
Prove the inequality
AF + AH + AC \leqAB + AD + AE + AG.
In what cases does equality hold?

## Solution

Setting x1 = −−\to
AB, x2 = −−\to
AD, x3 = −\to
AE, we have to prove that
\parallelx1 + x2\parallel+ \parallelx2 + x3\parallel+ \parallelx3 + x1\parallel\leq\parallelx1\parallel+ \parallelx2\parallel+ \parallelx3\parallel+ \parallelx1 + x2 + x3\parallel.
We have
(\parallelx1\parallel+ \parallelx2\parallel+ \parallelx3\parallel)2 −\parallelx1 + x2 + x3\parallel2
= 2

1\leqi<j\leq3
(\parallelxi\parallel\parallelxj\parallel−⟨xi, xj⟩) =

1\leqi<j\leq3

(\parallelxi\parallel+ \parallelxj\parallel)2 −\parallelxi + xj\parallel2
=

1\leqi<j\leq3
(\parallelxi\parallel+ \parallelxj\parallel+ \parallelxi + xj\parallel)(\parallelxi\parallel+ \parallelxj\parallel−\parallelxi + xj\parallel).
The following two inequalities are obvious:
\parallelxi\parallel+ \parallelxj\parallel−\parallelxi + xj\parallel\geq0,
(1)
\parallelxi\parallel+ \parallelxj\parallel+ \parallelxi + xj\parallel\leq\parallelx1\parallel+ \parallelx2\parallel+ \parallelx3\parallel+ \parallelx1 + x2 + x3\parallel.
(2)
It follows that
(\parallelx1\parallel+ \parallelx2\parallel+ \parallelx3\parallel)2 −\parallelx1 + x2 + x3\parallel2
\leq


i=1
\parallelxi\parallel+
&&&&&

i=1
xi
&&&&&
⎛
⎝2

i=1
\parallelxi\parallel−

1\leqi<j\leq3
\parallelxi + xj\parallel
⎞
⎠,
and dividing by the positive number 3
i=1 \parallelxi\parallel+
&&&3
i=1 xi
&&& we obtain

i=1
\parallelxi\parallel−
&&&&&

i=1
xi
&&&&& \leq2

i=1
\parallelxi\parallel−

1\leqi<j\leq3
\parallelxi + xj\parallel.
The inequality is proven. Let us analyze the cases of equality. If one of
the vectors is null, then equality obviously holds. Suppose that xi ̸= 0,
i = 1, 2, 3. For every i, j, at least one of (1) and (2) is equality. Equality
in (1) holds if and only if xi and xj are collinear with the same direction,
while in (2) it holds if and only if −xk and x1 + x2 + x3 are collinear with
the same direction. If not all the vectors are collinear, then there are at
least two distinct pairs xi, xj, i < j, for which (2) is an equality, so at least
two of xi are collinear with x1 + x2 + x3, but then so is the third; hence,
the sum x1 + x2 + x3 must be 0. Thus the cases of equality are (a) the

vectors are collinear with the same direction; (b) the vectors are collinear,
two of them have the same direction, say xi, xj, and \parallelxk\parallel\geq\parallelxi\parallel+ \parallelxj\parallel;
(c) one of the vectors is 0; (d) their sum is 0.
Second solution. The following technique, although not quite elementary,
is often used to eﬀectively reduce geometric inequalities of ﬁrst degree,
like this one, to the one-dimensional case.
Let \sigma be a ﬁxed sphere with center O. For an arbitrary segment d in
space, and any line l, we denote by \pil(d) the length of the projection of d
onto l. Consider the integral of lengths of these projections on all possible
directions of OP, with P moving on the sphere:
=
\sigma \piOP (d) d\sigma. It is clear
that this value depends only on the length of d (because of symmetry);
hence
A
\sigma
\piOP d\sigma = c \cdot |d|
for some constant c ̸= 0.
(1)
Notice that by the one-dimensional case, for any point P \in\sigma,
\piOP (x1) + \piOP (x2) + \piOP (x3) + \piOP (x1 + x2 + x3)
\geq\piOP (x1 + x2) + \piOP (x1 + x3) + \piOP (x2 + x3).
By integration on \sigma, using (1), we obtain
c(\parallelx1\parallel+\parallelx2\parallel+\parallelx3\parallel+\parallelx1+x2+x3\parallel) \geqc(\parallelx1+x2\parallel+\parallelx1+x3\parallel+\parallelx2+x3\parallel).
