---
title: "IMO 1987 SL 8"
description: "(a) Let (m, k) = 1. Prove that there exist integers a1, a2, . . . , am"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1987
type: "shortlist"
number: 8
origin: "HUN"
weight: 198700008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1987 SL 8

**Origin:** HUN

## Problem

(a) Let (m, k) = 1. Prove that there exist integers a1, a2, . . . , am
and b1, b2, . . . , bk such that each product aibj (i = 1, 2, . . ., m; j =
1, 2, . . . , k) gives a diﬀerent residue when divided by mk.
(b) Let (m, k) > 1. Prove that for any integers a1, a2, . . . , am and b1, b2,
. . . , bk there must be two products aibj and asbt ((i, j) ̸= (s, t)) that
give the same residue when divided by mk.

## Solution

(a) Consider
ai = ik + 1,
i = 1, 2, . . ., m;
bj = jm + 1,
j = 1, 2, . . ., k.
Assume that mk | aibj −asbt = (ik + 1)(jm + 1) −(sk + 1)(tm + 1) =
km(ij −st)+m(j −t)+k(i−s). Since m divides this sum, we get that
m | k(i −s), or, together with gcd(k, m) = 1, that i = s. Similarly
j = t, which proves part (a).

(b) Suppose the opposite, i.e., that all the residues are distinct. Then the
residue 0 must also occur, say at a1b1: mk | a1b1; so, for some a′ and
b′, a′ | a1, b′ | b1, and a′b′ = mk. Assuming that for some i, s ̸= i,
a′ | ai −as, we obtain mk = a′b′ | aib1 −asb1, a contradiction. This
shows that a′ \geqm and similarly b′ \geqk, and thus from a′b′ = mk we
have a′ = m, b′ = k. We also get (1): all ai’s give distinct residues
modulo m = a′, and all bj’s give distinct residues modulo k = b′.
Now let p be a common prime divisor of m and k. By (∗), exactly
p−1
p m of ai’s and exactly p−1
p k of bj’s are not divisible by p. Therefore
there are precisely (p−1)2
p2
mk products aibj that are not divisible by
p, although from the assumption that they all give distinct residues it
follows that the number of such products is p−1
p mk ̸= (p−1)2
p2
mk. We
have arrived at a contradiction, thus proving (b).
