---
title: "IMO 2012 Shortlist A6"
description: "Let f : N → N be a function, and let fm be f applied m times. Suppose that for every n ∈ N there exists a k ∈ N such tha..."
tags: ["imo", "mathematics", "olympiad", "shortlist", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
imo_year: 2012
imo_shortlist_category: "A"
imo_shortlist_number: 6
weight: 20120106
draft: false
---

[IMO 2012 Shortlist A6](https://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2012SL.pdf)

**Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Let f : N → N be a function, and let fm
be f applied m times. Suppose that for
every n ∈ N there exists a k ∈ N such that f2k
(n) = n + k, and let kn be the smallest such k.
Prove that the sequence k1,k2,... is unbounded.
Solution. We restrict attention to the set
S = {1,f(1),f2
(1),...}.
Observe that S is unbounded because for every number n in S there exists a k > 0 such
that f2k
(n) = n + k is in S. Clearly f maps S into itself; moreover f is injective on S. Indeed
if fi
(1) = fj
(1) with i 6= j then the values fm
(1) start repeating periodically from some point
on, and S would be finite.
Define g : S → S by g(n) = f2kn
(n) = n + kn. We prove that g is injective too. Suppose
that g(a) = g(b) with a < b. Then a + ka = f2ka
(a) = f2kb(b) = b + kb implies ka > kb. So,
since f is injective on S, we obtain
f2(ka−kb)
(a) = b = a + (ka − kb).
However this contradicts the minimality of ka as 0 < ka − kb < ka.
Let T be the set of elements of S that are not of the form g(n) with n ∈ S. Note that 1 ∈ T
by g(n) > n for n ∈ S, so T is non-empty. For each t ∈ T denote Ct = {t,g(t),g2
(t),...};
call Ct the chain starting at t. Observe that distinct chains are disjoint because g is injective.
Each n ∈ S\T has the form n = g(n′
) with n′
< n, n′
∈ S. Repeated applications of the same
observation show that n ∈ Ct for some t ∈ T, i. e. S is the disjoint union of the chains Ct.
If fn
(1) is in the chain Ct starting at t = fnt
(1) then n = nt + 2a1 + ··· + 2aj with
fn
(1) = gj
(fnt
(1)) = f2aj
(f2aj−1
(···f2a1
(fnt
(1)))) = fnt
(1) + a1 + ··· + aj.
Hence
fn
(1) = fnt
(1) +
n − nt
= t +
n − nt
. (1)
Now we show that T is infinite. We argue by contradiction. Suppose that there are only
finitely many chains Ct1,...,Ctr , starting at t1 < ··· < tr. Fix N. If fn
(1) with 1 ≤ n ≤ N
is in Ct then fn
(1) = t + n−nt
≤ tr + N
by (1). But then the N + 1 distinct natural numbers
1,f(1),...,fN
(1) are all less than tr + N
and hence N +1 ≤ tr + N
. This is a contradiction if
N is sufficiently large, and hence T is infinite.
To complete the argument, choose any k in N and consider the k +1 chains starting at the
first k + 1 numbers in T. Let t be the greatest one among these numbers. Then each of the
chains in question contains a number not exceeding t, and at least one of them does not contain
any number among t+1,...,t+k. So there is a number n in this chain such that g(n)−n > k,
i. e. kn > k. In conclusion k1,k2,... is unbounded.17
