---
title: "IMO 2012 Shortlist C2"
description: "Let n ≥ 1 be an integer. What is the maximum number of disjoint pairs of elements of the set {1,2,...,n} such that the s..."
tags: ["imo", "mathematics", "olympiad", "shortlist", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
imo_year: 2012
imo_shortlist_category: "C"
imo_shortlist_number: 2
weight: 20120202
draft: false
---

[IMO 2012 Shortlist C2](https://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2012SL.pdf)

**Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let n ≥ 1 be an integer. What is the maximum number of disjoint pairs of elements of the
set {1,2,...,n} such that the sums of the different pairs are different integers not exceeding n?
Solution. Consider x such pairs in {1,2,...,n}. The sum S of the 2x numbers in them is at
least 1+2+···+2x since the pairs are disjoint. On the other hand S ≤ n+(n−1)+···+(n−x+1)
because the sums of the pairs are different and do not exceed n. This gives the inequality
2x(2x + 1)
≤ nx −
x(x − 1)
,
which leads to x ≤ 2n−1
. Hence there are at most
2n−1

pairs with the given properties.
We show a construction with exactly
2n−1

pairs. First consider the case n = 5k + 3 with
k ≥ 0, where
2n−1

= 2k + 1. The pairs are displayed in the following table.
Pairs
3k + 1 3k ··· 2k + 2 4k + 2 4k + 1 ··· 3k + 3 3k + 2
2 4 ··· 2k 1 3 ··· 2k − 1 2k + 1
Sums 3k + 3 3k + 4 ··· 4k + 2 4k + 3 4k + 4 ··· 5k + 2 5k + 3
The 2k+1 pairs involve all numbers from 1 to 4k+2; their sums are all numbers from 3k+3
to 5k + 3. The same construction works for n = 5k + 4 and n = 5k + 5 with k ≥ 0. In these
cases the required number
2n−1

of pairs equals 2k + 1 again, and the numbers in the table
do not exceed 5k + 3. In the case n = 5k + 2 with k ≥ 0 one needs only 2k pairs. They can
be obtained by ignoring the last column of the table (thus removing 5k + 3). Finally, 2k pairs
are also needed for the case n = 5k + 1 with k ≥ 0. Now it suffices to ignore the last column
of the table and then subtract 1 from each number in the first row.
Comment. The construction above is not unique. For instance, the following table shows another
set of 2k + 1 pairs for the cases n = 5k + 3, n = 5k + 4, and n = 5k + 5.
Pairs
1 2 ··· k k + 1 k + 2 ··· 2k + 1
4k + 1 4k − 1 ··· 2k + 3 4k + 2 4k ··· 2k + 2
Sums 4k + 2 4k + 1 ··· 3k + 3 5k + 3 5k + 2 ··· 4k + 3
The table for the case n = 5k + 2 would be the same, with the pair (k + 1,4k + 2) removed. For the
case n = 5k + 1 remove the last column and subtract 2 from each number in the second row.21
