---
title: "IMO 2012 Shortlist N6"
description: "Let x and y be positive integers. If x2n − 1 is divisible by 2n y + 1 for every positive integer n, prove that x = 1. So..."
tags: ["imo", "mathematics", "olympiad", "shortlist", "number-theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
imo_year: 2012
imo_shortlist_category: "N"
imo_shortlist_number: 6
weight: 20120406
draft: false
---

[IMO 2012 Shortlist N6](https://www.imo-official.org/problems/IMO2012SL.pdf)

**Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Let x and y be positive integers. If x2n
− 1 is divisible by 2n
y + 1 for every positive
integer n, prove that x = 1.
Solution. First we prove the following fact: For every positive integer y there exist infinitely
many primes p ≡ 3 (mod 4) such that p divides some number of the form 2n
y + 1.
Clearly it is enough to consider the case y odd. Let
2y + 1 = pe1
1 ···per
r
be the prime factorization of 2y + 1. Suppose on the contrary that there are finitely many
primes pr+1,...,pr+s ≡ 3 (mod 4) that divide some number of the form 2n
y + 1 but do not
divide 2y + 1.
We want to find an n such that pei
i ||2n
y+1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ r and pi ∤ 2n
y+1 for r+1 ≤ i ≤ r+s.
For this it suffices to take
n = 1 + ϕ(pe1+1
1 ···per+1
r p1
r+1 ···p1
r+s),
because then
2n
y + 1 ≡ 2y + 1 (mod pe1+1
1 ···per+1
r p1
r+1 ···p1
r+s).
The last congruence means that pe1
1 ,...,per
r divide exactly 2n
y + 1 and no prime pr+1,...,pr+s
divides 2n
y + 1. It follows that the prime factorization of 2n
y + 1 consists of the prime powers
pe1
1 ,...,per
r and powers of primes ≡ 1 (mod 4). Because y is odd, we obtain
2n
y + 1 ≡ pe1
1 ···per
r ≡ 2y + 1 ≡ 3 (mod 4).
This is a contradiction since n > 1, and so 2n
y + 1 ≡ 1 (mod 4).
Now we proceed to the problem. If p is a prime divisor of 2n
y + 1 the problem statement
implies that xd
≡ 1 (mod p) for d = 2n
. By Fermat’s little theorem the same congruence
holds for d = p − 1, so it must also hold for d = (2n
,p − 1). For p ≡ 3 (mod 4) we have
(2n
,p − 1) = 2, therefore in this case x2
≡ 1 (mod p).
In summary, we proved that every prime p ≡ 3 (mod 4) that divides some number of the
form 2n
y + 1 also divides x2
− 1. This is possible only if x = 1, otherwise by the above x2
− 1
would be a positive integer with infinitely many prime factors.
Comment. For each x and each odd prime p the maximal power of p dividing x2n
− 1 for some n is
bounded and hence the same must be true for the numbers 2ny + 1. We infer that p2 divides 2p−1 −1
for each prime divisor p of 2ny+1. However trying to reach a contradiction with this conclusion alone
seems hopeless, since it is not even known if there are infinitely many primes p without this property.49
