---
title: "IMO 1981 SL 4"
description: "Let {fn} be the Fibonacci sequence {1, 1, 2, 3, 5, . . .}."
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1981
type: "shortlist"
number: 4
origin: "CAN"
weight: 198100004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1981 SL 4

**Origin:** CAN

## Problem

Let {fn} be the Fibonacci sequence {1, 1, 2, 3, 5, . . .}.
(a) Find all pairs (a, b) of real numbers such that for each n, afn + bfn+1
is a member of the sequence.
(b) Find all pairs (u, v) of positive real numbers such that for each n,
uf 2
n + vf 2
n+1 is a member of the sequence.

## Solution

We shall use the known formula for the Fibonacci sequence
fn =
\sqrt
(\alphan −(−1)n\alpha−n),
where \alpha = 1 +
\sqrt
.
(1)
(a) Suppose that afn + bfn+1 = fkn for all n, where kn > 0 is an integer
depending on n. By (1), this is equivalent to a(\alphan −(−1)n\alpha−n) +
b(\alphan+1 + (−1)n\alpha−n−1) = \alphakn −(−1)kn\alpha−kn, i.e.,
\alphakn−n = a + b\alpha −\alpha−2n(−1)n(a −b\alpha−1 −(−\alpha)n−kn) \toa + b\alpha (2)
as n \to\infty. Hence, since kn is an integer, kn −n must be constant from
some point on: kn = n + k and \alphak = a + b\alpha. Then it follows from (2)
that \alpha−k = a −b\alpha−1, and from (1) we conclude that afn + bfn+1 =
fk+n holds for every n. Putting n = 1 and n = 2 in the previous
relation and solving the obtained system of equations we get a = fk−1,
b = fk. It is easy to verify that such a and b satisfy the conditions.
(b) As in (a), suppose that uf 2
n + vf 2
n+1 = fln for all n. This leads to
u + v\alpha2 −
\sqrt
5\alphaln−2n = 2(u −v)(−1)n\alpha−2n
−(u\alpha−4n + v\alpha−4n−2 + (−1)ln\sqrt
5\alpha−ln−2n)
\to0,
as n \to\infty. Thus u + v\alpha2 =
\sqrt
5\alphaln−2n, and ln −2n = k is equal to
a constant. Putting this into the above equation and multiplying by
\alpha2n we get u −v \to0 as n \to\infty, i.e., u = v. Finally, substituting
n = 1 and n = 2 in uf 2
n + uf 2
n+1 = fln we easily get that the only
possibility is u = v = 1 and k = 1. It is easy to verify that such u and
v satisfy the conditions.
