---
title: "IMO 1995 SL A4"
description: "Let a, b, and c be given positive real numbers. Determine all"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1995
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 4
origin: "USA"
weight: 199501004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1995 SL A4

**Origin:** USA  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Let a, b, and c be given positive real numbers. Determine all
positive real numbers x, y, and z such that
x + y + z = a + b + c
and
4xyz −(a2x + b2y + c2z) = abc.

## Solution

The second equation is equivalent to a2
yz + b2
zx + c2
xy + abc
xyz = 4. Let x1 =
a
\sqrtyz, y1 =
b
\sqrtzx, z1 =
c
\sqrtxy. Then x2
1 + y2
1 + z2
1 + x1y1z1 = 4, where
0 < x1, y1, z1 < 2. Regarding this as a quadratic equation in z1, the
discriminant (4−x2
1)(4−y2
1) suggests that we let x1 = 2 sin u, y1 = 2 sin v,
0 < u, v < \pi/2. Then it is directly shown that z1 will be exactly 2 cos(u+v)
as the only positive solution of the quadratic equation.
Thus a = 2\sqrtyz sin u, b = 2\sqrtxz sin v, c = 2\sqrtxy(cos u cos v −sin u sin v),
so from x + y + z −a −b −c = 0 we obtain
(\sqrtx cos v −\sqrty cos u)2 + (\sqrtx sin v + \sqrty sin u −\sqrtz)2 = 0,

which implies
\sqrtz = \sqrtx sin v + \sqrty sin u = 1
2(y1
\sqrtx + x1
\sqrty) = 1

b
\sqrtzx
\sqrtx +
a
\sqrtyz
\sqrty

.
Therefore z = a+b
2 . Similarly, x = b+c
and y = c+a
2 . It is clear that the
triple (x, y, z) =
 b+c
2 , c+a
2 , a+b

is indeed a (unique) solution of the given
system of equations.
Second solution.
Put x = b+c
−u, y = c+a
−v, z = a+b
−w, where
u \leq
b+c
2 , v \leq
c+a
2 , w \leq
a+b
and u + v + w = 0. The equality abc +
a2x + b2y + c2z = 4xyz becomes 2(au2 + bv2 + cw2 + 2uvw) = 0. Now
uvw > 0 is clearly impossible. On the other hand, if uvw \leq0, then two
of u, v, w are nonnegative, say u, v \geq0. Taking into account w = −u −v,
the above equality reduces to 2[(a+c−2v)u2 +(b+c−2u)v2 +2cuv] = 0,
so u = v = 0.
Third solution. The fact that we are given two equations and three vari-
ables suggests that this is essentially a problem on inequalities. Setting
f(x, y, z) = 4xyz −a2x −b2y −c2z, we should show that max f(x, y, z) =
abc, for 0 < x, y, z, x + y + z = a + b + c, and ﬁnd when this value is
attained. Thus we apply Lagrange multipliers to F(x, y, z) = f(x, y, z) −
\lambda(x + y + z −a −b −c), and obtain that f takes a maximum at (x, y, z)
such that 4yz −a2 = 4zx −b2 = 4xy −c2 = \lambda and x + y + z = a + b + c.
The only solution of this system is (x, y, z) =
 b+c
2 , c+a
2 , a+b

.
