---
title: "IMO 1995 SL G4"
description: "An acute triangle ABC is given. Points A1 and A2 are taken"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1995
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 4
origin: "UKR"
weight: 199503004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1995 SL G4

**Origin:** UKR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

An acute triangle ABC is given. Points A1 and A2 are taken
on the side BC (with A2 between A1 and C), B1 and B2 on the side AC
(with B2 between B1 and A), and C1 and C2 on the side AB (with C2
between C1 and B) such that
\angleAA1A2 = \angleAA2A1 = \angleBB1B2 = \angleBB2B1 = \angleCC1C2 = \angleCC2C1.
The lines AA1, BB1, and CC1 form a triangle, and the lines AA2, BB2,
and CC2 form a second triangle. Prove that all six vertices of these two
triangles lie on a single circle.

## Solution

Let the two triangles be X1Y1Z1, X2Y2Z2, with X1 = BB1 \capCC1, Y1 =
CC1 \capAA1, Z1
=AA1 \capBB1,
X2 = BB2 \capCC2, Y2 = CC2 \cap
AA2, Z2 = AA2 \capBB2. First, we
observe that \angleABB2 = \angleACC1
and \angleABB1
=
\angleACC2. Conse-
quently \angleBZ1A1
=
\angleBAA1 +
\angleABB1 = \angleBCC2 + \angleC2CA =
\angleC and similarly \angleAZ2B2 = \angleC,
\angleAY1C1
=
\angleCY2A2
=
\angleB.
Also, \triangleABB2 ∼\triangleACC1; hence
AC1/AC = AB2/AB.
A
B
C
A1
A2
B1
B2
C1
C2
Y1
Z1
X1
Z2
X2
Y2
From the sine formula, we obtain
AZ1
sin \angleABZ1
=
AB
sin \angleAZ1B =
AB
sin \angleC =
AC
sin \angleB =
AC
sin \angleAY2C
=
AY2
sin \angleACY2
=⇒
AZ1 = AY2.
Analogously, BX1 = BZ2 and CY1 = CX2. Furthermore, again from the
sine formula,

AY1
sin \angleAC1Y1
=
AC1
sin \angleAY1C1
= AC1
AC
AC
sin \angleB
= AB2
AB
AB
sin \angleC =
AB2
sin \angleAZ2B2
=
AZ2
sin \angleAB2Z2
.
Hence, AY1 = AZ2 and, analogously, BZ1 = BX2 and CX1 = CY2. We
deduce that Y1Z2 \parallelBC and Z2X1 \parallelAC, which gives us \angleY1Z2X1 =
180◦−\angleC = 180◦−\angleY1Z1X1. It follows that Z2 lies on the circle cir-
cumscribed about \triangleX1Y1Z1. Similarly, so do X2 and Y2.
Second solution.
Let H be the orthocenter of \triangleABC. Triangles AHB,
BHC, CHA, ABC have the same circumradius R. Additionally,
\angleHAAi = \angleHBBi = \angleHCCi = \theta (i = 1, 2).
Since \angleHBX1 = \angleHCX1 = \theta, BCX1H is concyclic and therefore HX1 =
2R sin \theta. The same holds for HY1, HZ1, HX2, HY2, HZ2. Hence Xi, Yi, Zi
(i = 1, 2) lie on a circle centered at H.
