---
title: "IMO 1995 SL G7"
description: "O is a point inside a convex quadrilateral ABCD of area"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1995
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 7
origin: "LAT"
weight: 199503007
draft: false
---

# IMO 1995 SL G7

**Origin:** LAT  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

O is a point inside a convex quadrilateral ABCD of area
S. K, L, M, and N are interior points of the sides AB, BC, CD, and
DA respectively. If OKBL and OMDN are parallelograms, prove that
\sqrt
S \geq\sqrtS1 + \sqrtS2, where S1 and S2 are the areas of ONAK and OLCM
respectively.

## Solution

If O lies on AC, then ABCD, AKON, and OLCM are similar; hence
AC = AO+OC implies
\sqrt
S = \sqrtS1 +\sqrtS2. Assume that O does not lie on
AC and that w.l.o.g. it lies inside triangle ADC. Let us denote by T1, T2
the areas of parallelograms KBLO, NOMD respectively. Consider a line
through O that intersects AD, DC, CB, BA respectively at X, Y, Z, W so
that OW/OX = OZ/OY (such a line exists by a continuity argument:
the left side is smaller when W = X = A, but greater when Y = Z = C).
The desired inequality is equivalent
to T1 + T2 \geq2\sqrtS1S2. Since trian-
gles WKO, OLZ, WBZ are similar
and WO + OZ = WZ, we have
\sqrtSWKO + \sqrtSOLZ = \sqrtSWBZ =
\sqrtSWKO + SOLZ + T1, which im-
plies T1 = 2\sqrtSWKOSOLZ. Simi-
larly, T2 = 2\sqrtSXNOSOMY .
Since OW/OZ = OX/OY , we have
SWKO/SXNO = SOLZ/SOMY .
A
B
C
D
O
K
L
M
N
S1
S2
T1
T2
X
Y
Z
W
Therefore we obtain
T1 + T2 = 2

SWKOSOLZ + 2

SXNOSOMY
= 2

(SWKO + SXNO)(SOLZ + SOMY ) \geq2

S1S2.
Second solution. By an aﬃne transformation of the plane one can trans-
form any nondegenerate quadrilateral into a cyclic one, thereby preserving
parallelness and ratios of areas. Thus we may assume w.l.o.g. that ABCD
is cyclic.
By a well-known formula, the area of a cyclic quadrilateral with sides
a, b, c, d and semiperimeter p is given by
S =

(p −a)(p −b)(p −c)(p −d) .
Let us set AK = a1, KB = b1, BL = a2, LC = b2, CM = a3, MD = b3,
DN = a4, NA = b4. Then the sides of quadrilateral AKON are ai, the
sides of CLOM are bi, and the sides of ABCD are ai + bi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4).
If p and q are the semiperimeters of AKON and CLOM, and xi = p−ai,
yi = q −bi, then we have S1 = \sqrtx1x2x3x4, S2 = \sqrty1y2y3y4, and S =

(x1 + y1)(x2 + y2)(x3 + y3)(x4 + y4) . Thus we need to show that

4\sqrtx1x2x3x4 +
4\sqrty1y2y3y4 \leq
(x1 + y1)(x2 + y2)(x3 + y3)(x4 + y4) .
By setting yi = tixi we reduce this inequality to 1 +
4\sqrtt1t2t3t4 \leq
(1 + t1)(1 + t2)(1 + t3)(1 + t4) . One way to prove the last inequality
is to apply the simple inequality
1 + \sqrtuv \leq

(1 + u)(1 + v)
to \sqrtt1t2, \sqrtt3t4 and then to t1, t2 and t3, t4.
