---
title: "IMO 1995 SL G8"
description: "Let ABC be a triangle. A circle passing through B and C in-"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1995
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 8
origin: "COL"
weight: 199503008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1995 SL G8

**Origin:** COL  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let ABC be a triangle. A circle passing through B and C in-
tersects the sides AB and AC again at C′ and B′, respectively. Prove that
BB′, CC′, and HH′ are concurrent, where H and H′ are the orthocenters
of triangles ABC and AB′C′ respectively.

## Solution

Let BB′ cut CC′ at P. Since \angleB′BC′ = \angleB′CC′, it follows that
\anglePBH = \anglePCH. Let D and E be points such that BPCD and HPCE
are parallelograms (consequently, so is BHED). Triangles BAC and
C′AB′ are similar, from which we deduce that \triangleB′H′C′ and \triangleBHC
are similar, as well as \triangleB′PC′
and \triangleBDC. Hence B′PC′H′ and
BDCH are similar, from which we
obtain \angleH′PB′ = \angleHDB. Now
\angleCDE = \anglePBH = \anglePCH =
\angleCHE
implies
that
HCED
is
a
cyclic
quadrilateral. Therefore
\angleBPH = \angleDCE = \angleDHE =
\angleHDB
= \angleH′PB′; hence HH′
also passes through P.
B
A
C
C′
B′
H
H′
P
D
E
Second solution.
Observe that \triangleHBC ∼\triangleH′B′C′, \anglePBH = \anglePCH
and \anglePB′H′ = \anglePC′H′.
By Ceva’s theorem in trigonometric form applied to \triangleBPC and the point
H, we have sin \angleBPH
sin \angleHPC = sin \angleHBP
sin \angleHBC \cdot sin \angleHCB
sin \angleHCP = sin \angleHCB
sin \angleHBC . Similarly, Ceva’s
theorem for \triangleB′PC′ and point H′ yields sin \angleB′PH′
sin \angleH′PC′ = sin \angleH′C′B′
sin \angleH′B′C′ . Thus
it follows that
sin \angleB′PH′
sin \angleH′PC′ = sin \angleBPH
sin \angleHPC ,
which ﬁnally implies that \angleBPH = \angleB′PH′.
