---
title: "IMO 1995 SL N5"
description: "At a meeting of 12k people, each person exchanges greetings"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1995
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 5
origin: "IRE"
weight: 199504005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1995 SL N5

**Origin:** IRE  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

At a meeting of 12k people, each person exchanges greetings
with exactly 3k + 6 others. For any two people, the number who exchange
greetings with both is the same. How many people are at the meeting?

## Solution

For each two people let n be the number of people exchanging greetings
with both of them. To determine n in terms of k, we shall count in two
ways the number of triples (A, B, C) of people such that A exchanged
greetings with both B and C, but B and C mutually did not.
There are 12k possibilities for A, and for each A there are (3k + 6) possi-
bilities for B. Since there are n people who exchanged greetings with both

A and B, there are 3k + 5 −n who did so with A but not with B. Thus
the number of triples (A, B, C) is 12k(3k + 6)(3k + 5 −n). On the other
hand, there are 12k possible choices of B, and 12k −1 −(3k + 6) = 9k −7
possible choices of C; for every B, C, A can be chosen in n ways, so the
number of considered triples equals 12kn(9k −7).
Hence (3k + 6)(3k + 5 −n) = n(9k −7), i.e., n = 3(k+2)(3k+5)
12k−1
. This gives
us that 4n
3 = 12k2+44k+40
12k−1
= k + 4 −3k−44
12k−1 is an integer too. It is directly
veriﬁed that only k = 3 gives an integer value for n, namely n = 6.
Remark.
The solution is complete under the assumption that such a k
exists. We give an example of such a party with 36 persons, k = 3. Let
the people sit in a 6 \times 6 array [Pij]6
i,j=1, and suppose that two persons
Pij, Pkl exchanged greetings if and only if i = k or j = l or i −j \equivk −l
(mod 6). Thus each person exchanged greetings with exactly 15 others,
and it is easily veriﬁed that this party satisﬁes the conditions.
