---
title: "IMO 1995 SL N6"
description: "Let p be an odd prime. Find the number of p-element"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1995
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 6
origin: "POL"
weight: 199504006
draft: false
---

# IMO 1995 SL N6

**Origin:** POL  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Let p be an odd prime. Find the number of p-element
subsets A of {1, 2, . . ., 2p} such that the sum of all elements of A is divisible
by p.

## Solution

We shall consider the set M = {0, 1, . . ., 2p ŌłÆ1} instead. Let M1 =
{0, 1, . . ., p ŌłÆ1} and M2 = {p, p + 1, . . . , 2p ŌłÆ1}. We shall denote by
|A| and \sigma(A) the number of elements and the sum of elements of the set
A; also, let Cp be the family of all p-element subsets of M. De’¼üne the
mapping T : Cp \toCp as T (A) = {x + 1 | x \inA \capM1} \cup{A \capM2}, the
addition being modulo p. There are exactly two ’¼üxed points of T : these
are M1 and M2. Now if A is any subset from Cp distinct from M1, M2,
and k = |A \capM1| with 1 \leqk \leqp ŌłÆ1, then for i = 0, 1, . . . , p ŌłÆ1,
\sigma(T i(A)) = \sigma(A) + ik (mod p). Hence subsets A, T (A), . . . , T pŌłÆ1(A) are
distinct, and exactly one of them has sum of elements divisible by p. Since
\sigma(M1), \sigma(M2) are divisible by p and Cp \ {M1, M2} decomposes into fam-
ilies of the form {A, T (A), . . . , T pŌłÆ1(A)}, we conclude that the required
number is 1
p(|Cp| ŌłÆ2) + 2 = 1
p
2p
p

ŌłÆ2

+ 2.
Second solution.
Let Ck be the family of all k-element subsets of
{1, 2, . . ., 2p}. Denote by Mk (k = 1, 2, . . . , p) the family of p-element mul-
tisets with k distinct elements from {1, 2, . . ., 2p}, exactly one of which ap-
pears more than once, that have sum of elements divisible by p. It is clear
that every subset from Ck, k < p, can be complemented to a multiset from
Mk \cupMk+1 in exactly two ways, since the equation (p ŌłÆk)a \equiv0 (mod p)
has exactly two solutions in {1, 2, . . ., 2p}. On the other hand, every mul-
tiset from Mk can be obtained by completing exactly one subset from
Ck. Additionally, a multiset from Mk can be obtained from exactly one
subset from CkŌłÆ1 if k < p, and from exactly p subsets from CkŌłÆ1 if k = p.
Therefore |Mk| + |Mk+1| = 2|Ck| = 2
2p
k

for k = 1, 2, . . ., p ŌłÆ2, and
|MpŌłÆ1| + p|Mp| = 2|CpŌłÆ1| = 2
 2p
pŌłÆ1

. Since M1 = 2p, it is not di’¼ācult to
show using recursion that |Mp| = 1
p
2p
p

ŌłÆ2

+ 2.

Third solution.
Let \omega = cos 2\pi
p + i sin 2\pi
p . We have $2p
i=1(x ŌłÆ\omegai) =
(xp ŌłÆ1)2 = x2p ŌłÆ2xp + 1; hence comparing the coe’¼ācients at xp, we
obtain  \omegai1+\cdot\cdot\cdot+ip = pŌłÆ1
i=0 ai\omegai = 2, where the ’¼ürst sum runs over all
p-subsets {i1, . . . , ip} of {1, . . . , 2p}, and ai is the number of such subsets
for which i1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ip \equivi (mod p). Setting q(x) = ŌłÆ2 + pŌłÆ1
i=0 aixi, we
obtain q(\omegaj) = 0 for j = 1, 2, . . ., pŌłÆ1. Hence 1+x+\cdot \cdot \cdot+xpŌłÆ1 | q(x), and
since deg q = pŌłÆ1, we have q(x) = ŌłÆ2+pŌłÆ1
i=0 aixi = c(1+x+\cdot \cdot \cdot+xpŌłÆ1)
for some constant c. Thus a0 ŌłÆ2 = a1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = apŌłÆ1, which together with
a0 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + apŌłÆ1 =
2p
p

yields a0 = 1
p
2p
p

ŌłÆ2

+ 2.
