---
title: "IMO 1995 SL N7"
description: "Does there exist an integer n > 1 that satisﬁes the following"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1995
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 7
origin: "BLR"
weight: 199504007
draft: false
---

# IMO 1995 SL N7

**Origin:** BLR  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Does there exist an integer n > 1 that satisﬁes the following
condition?
The set of positive integers can be partitioned into n nonempty subsets
such that an arbitrary sum of n −1 integers, one taken from each of any
n −1 of the subsets, lies in the remaining subset.

## Solution

We shall show that there is no such n. Certainly, n = 2 does not work,
so suppose n \geq3. Let a, b be distinct elements of A1, and c any integer
greater than −a and −b. We claim that a + c, b + c belong to the same
subsets. Suppose to the contrary that a+c \inA1 and b+c \inA2, and take
arbitrary elements xi \inAi, i = 3, . . . , n. The number b + x3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn is
in A2, so that s = (a + c) + (b + x3 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn) + x4 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn must be in
A3. On the other hand, a+x3 +\cdot \cdot \cdot+xn \inA2, so s = (a+x3 +\cdot \cdot \cdot+xn)+
(b + c) + x4 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn is in A1, a contradiction. Similarly, if a + c \inA2
and b + c \inA3, then s = a + (b + c) + x4 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn belongs to A2, but
also s = b + (a + c) + x4 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn \inA3, which is impossible.
For i = 1, . . . , n choose xi \inAi; set s = x1 +\cdot \cdot \cdot+xn and yi = s−xi. Then
yi \inAi. By what has been proved above, 2xi = xi+xi belongs to the same
subset as xi + yi = s does. It follows that all numbers 2xi, i = 1, . . . , n,
are in the same subset. Since we can arbitrarily take xi from each set Ai,
it follows that all even numbers belong to the same set, say A1. Similarly,
2xi + 1 = (xi + 1) + xi is in the subset to which (xi + 1) + yi = s + 1
belongs for all i = 1, . . . , n; hence all odd numbers greater than 1 are in
the same subset, say A2. By the above considerations, 3 −2 = 1 \inA2
also. But then nothing remains in A3, . . . , An, a contradiction.
