---
title: "IMO 2001 SL A6"
description: "Prove that for all positive real numbers a, b, c,"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2001
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 6
origin: "KOR"
weight: 200101006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2001 SL A6

**Origin:** KOR  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Prove that for all positive real numbers a, b, c,
a
\sqrt
a2 + 8bc
+
a
\sqrt
b2 + 8ca
+
c
\sqrt
c2 + 8ab
\geq1.

## Solution

We shall determine a constant k > 0 such that
a
\sqrt
a2 + 8bc
\geq
ak
ak + bk + ck
for all a, b, c > 0.
(1)
This inequality is equivalent to (ak + bk + ck)2 \geqa2k−2(a2 + 8bc), which
further reduces to
(ak + bk + ck)2 −a2k \geq8a2k−2bc.
On the other hand, the AM–GM inequality yields
(ak + bk + ck)2 −a2k = (bk + ck)(2ak + bk + ck) \geq8ak/2b3k/4c3k/4,
and therefore k = 4/3 is a good choice. Now we have
a
\sqrt
a2 + 8bc +
b
\sqrt
b2 + 8ca +
c
\sqrt
c2 + 8ab
\geq
a4/3
a4/3 + b4/3 + c4/3 +
b4/3
a4/3 + b4/3 + c4/3 +
c4/3
a4/3 + b4/3 + c4/3 = 1.
Second solution. The numbers x =
a
\sqrt
a2+8bc, y =
b
\sqrt
b2+8ca and z =
c
\sqrt
c2+8ab
satisfy
f(x, y, z) =
 1
x2 −1
  1
y2 −1
  1
z2 −1

= 83.

Our task is to prove x + y + z \geq1.
Since f is decreasing on each of the variables x, y, z, this is the same as
proving that x, y, z > 0, x + y + z = 1 implies f(x, y, z) \geq83. However,
since
x2 −1 = (x+y+z)2−x2
x2
= (2x+y+z)(y+z)
x2
, the inequality f(x, y, z) \geq83
becomes
(2x + y + z)(x + 2y + z)(x + y + 2z)(y + z)(z + x)(x + y)
x2y2z2
\geq83,
which follows immediately by the AM–GM inequality.
Third solution.
We shall prove a more general fact: the inequality
a
\sqrt
a2+kbc +
b
\sqrt
b2+kca +
c
\sqrt
c2+kab \geq
\sqrt1+k is true for all a, b, c > 0 if and
only if k \geq8.
Firstly suppose that k \geq8. Setting x = bc/a2, y = ca/b2, z = ab/c2, we
reduce the desired inequality to
F(x, y, z) = f(x) + f(y) + f(z) \geq
\sqrt
1 + k ,
where f(t) =
\sqrt
1 + kt, (2)
for x, y, z > 0 such that xyz = 1. We shall prove (2) using the method of
Lagrange multipliers.
The boundary of the set D = {(x, y, z) \inR3
+ | xyz = 1} consists of points
(x, y, z) with one of x, y, z being 0 and another one being +\infty. If w.l.o.g.
x = 0, then F(x, y, z) \geqf(x) = 1 \geq3/
\sqrt
1 + k.
Suppose now that (x, y, z) is a point of local minimum of F on D.
There exists \lambda \inR such that (x, y, z) is stationary point of the function
F(x, y, z)+\lambdaxyz. Then (x, y, z, \lambda) is a solution to the system f ′(x)+\lambdayz =
f ′(y) + \lambdaxz = f ′(z) + \lambdaxy = 0, xyz = 1. Eliminating \lambda gives us
xf ′(x) = yf ′(y) = zf ′(z),
xyz = 1.
(3)
The function tf ′(t) =
−kt
2(1+kt)3/2 decreases on the interval (0, 2/k] and
increases on [2/k, +\infty) because (tf ′(t))′ =
k(kt−2)
4(1+kt)5/2 . It follows that two
of the numbers x, y, z are equal. If x = y = z, then (1, 1, 1) is the only
solution to (3). Suppose that x = y ̸= z. Since (yf ′(y))2 −(zf ′(z))2 =
k2(z−y)(k3y2z2−3kyz−y−z)
4(1+ky)3(1+kz)3
, (3) gives us y2z = 1 and k3y2z2−3kyz−y−z =
0. Eliminating z we obtain an equation in y, k3/y2 −3k/y −y −1/y2 = 0,
whose only real solution is y = k −1. Thus (k −1, k −1, 1/(k −1)2) and
the cyclic permutations are the only solutions to (3) with x, y, z being
not all equal. Since F(k −1, k −1, 1/(k −1)2) = (k + 1)/
\sqrt
k2 −k + 1 >
F(1, 1, 1) = 1, the inequality (2) follows.
For 0 < k < 8 we have that
a
\sqrt
a2+kbc +
b
\sqrt
b2+kca +
c
\sqrt
c2+kab >
a
\sqrt
a2+8bc +
b
\sqrt
b2+8ca +
c
\sqrt
c2+8ab \geq1. If we ﬁx c and let a, b tend to 0, the ﬁrst two sum-
mands will tend to 0 while the third will tend to 1. Hence the inequality
cannot be improved.
