---
title: "IMO 2001 SL C7"
description: "A pile of n pebbles is placed in a vertical column. This"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2001
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 7
origin: "FRA"
weight: 200102007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2001 SL C7

**Origin:** FRA  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

A pile of n pebbles is placed in a vertical column. This
conﬁguration is modiﬁed according to the following rules. A pebble can
be moved if it is at the top of a column that contains at least two more
pebbles than the column immediately to its right. (If there are no pebbles
to the right, think of this as a column with 0 pebbles.) At each stage,
choose a pebble from among those that can be moved (if there are any)
and place it at the top of the column to its right. If no pebbles can be
moved, the conﬁguration is called a ﬁnal conﬁguration. For each n, show
that no matter what choices are made at each stage, the ﬁnal conﬁguration
is unique. Describe that conﬁguration in terms of n.

## Solution

At any moment, let pi be the number of pebbles in the ith column, i =
1, 2, . . . . The ﬁnal conﬁguration has obvious properties p1 \geqp2 \geq\cdot \cdot \cdot and
pi+1 \in{pi, pi −1}. We claim that pi+1 = pi > 0 is possible for at most
one i.
Assume the opposite. Then the ﬁnal conﬁguration has the property that
for some r and s > r we have pr+1 = pr, ps+1 = ps > 0 and pr+k =
pr+1 −k + 1 for all k = 1, . . . , s −r. Consider the earliest conﬁguration,
say C, with this property. What was the last move before C? The only
possibilities are moving a pebble either from the rth or from the sth
column; however, in both cases the conﬁguration preceding this last move
had the same property, contradicting the assumption that C is the earliest.
Therefore the ﬁnal conﬁguration looks as follows: p1 = a \inN, and for
some r, pi equals a −(i −1) if i \leqr, and a −(i −2) otherwise. It is
easy to determine a, r: since n = p1 + p2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot = (a+1)(a+2)
−r, we get
a(a+1)
\leqn < (a+1)(a+2)
, from which we uniquely ﬁnd a and then r as
well.
The ﬁnal conﬁguration for n = 13:
•
• • •
• • • •
• • • • •
