---
title: "IMO 2001 SL C8"
description: "Twenty-one girls and twenty-one boys took part in a"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2001
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 8
origin: "GER"
weight: 200102008
draft: false
---

# IMO 2001 SL C8

**Origin:** GER  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Twenty-one girls and twenty-one boys took part in a
mathematical competition. It turned out that
(i) each contestant solved at most six problems, and
(ii) for each pair of a girl and a boy, there was at least one problem that
was solved by both the girl and the boy.
Show that there is a problem that was solved by at least three girls and
at least three boys.

## Solution

We say that a problem is diﬃcult for boys if at most two boys solved it,
and diﬃcult for girls if at most two girls solved it.
Let us estimate the number of pairs boy-girl both of whom solved some
problem diﬃcult for boys. Consider any girl. By the condition (ii), among
the six problems she solved, at least one was solved by at least 3 boys, and
hence at most 5 were diﬃcult for boys. Since each of these problems was
solved by at most 2 boys and there are 21 girls, the considered number of
pairs does not exceed 5 \cdot 2 \cdot 21 = 210.
Similarly, there are at most 210 pairs boy-girl both of whom solved some
problem diﬃcult for girls. On the other hand, there are 212 > 2 \cdot210 pairs
boy-girl, and each of them solved one problem in common. Thus some
problems were diﬃcult neither for girls nor for boys, as claimed.
Remark. The statement can be generalized: if 2(m −1)(n −1) + 1 boys
and as many girls participated, and nobody solved more than m problems,
then some problem was solved by at least n boys and n girls.
