---
title: "IMO 2001 SL G1"
description: "Let A1 be the center of the square inscribed in acute triangle"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2001
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 1
origin: "UKR"
weight: 200103001
draft: false
---

# IMO 2001 SL G1

**Origin:** UKR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let A1 be the center of the square inscribed in acute triangle
ABC with two vertices of the square on side BC. Thus one of the two re-
maining vertices of the square is on side AB and the other is on AC. Points
B1, C1 are deﬁned in a similar way for inscribed squares with two vertices
on sides AC and AB, respectively. Prove that lines AA1, BB1, CC1 are
concurrent.

## Solution

Let MNPQ be the square inscribed in \triangleABC with M \inAB, N \inAC,
P, Q \inBC, and let AA1 meet MN, PQ at K, X respectively. Put MK =
PX = m, NK = QX = n, and MN = d. Then
BX
XC = m
n = BX + m
XC + n = BP
CQ = d cot \beta + d
d cot \gamma + d = cot \beta + 1
cot \gamma + 1.
Similarly, if BB1 and CC1 meet AC and BC at Y, Z respectively then
CY
Y A = cot \gamma+1
cot \alpha+1 and AZ
ZB = cot \alpha+1
cot \beta+1. Therefore BX
XC
CY
Y A
AZ
ZB = 1, so by Ceva’s
theorem, AX, BY, CZ have a common point.

Second solution. Let A2 be the center of the square constructed over BC
outside \triangleABC. Since this square and the inscribed square correspond-
ing to the side BC are homothetic, A, A1, and A2 are collinear. Points
B2, C2 are analogously deﬁned. Denote the angles BAA2, A2AC, CBB2,
B2BA, ACC2, C2CB by \alpha1, \alpha2, \beta1, \beta2, \gamma1, \gamma2. By the law of sines we have
sin \alpha1
sin \alpha2
= sin(\beta + 45◦)
sin(\gamma + 45◦),
sin \beta1
sin \beta2
= sin(\gamma + 45◦)
sin(\alpha + 45◦),
sin \gamma1
sin \gamma2
= sin(\alpha + 45◦)
sin(\beta + 45◦).
Since the product of these ratios is 1, by the trigonometric Ceva’s theorem
AA2, BB2, CC2 are concurrent.
