---
title: "IMO 2001 SL G3"
description: "Let ABC be a triangle with centroid G. Determine, with"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2001
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 3
origin: "GBR"
weight: 200103003
draft: false
---

# IMO 2001 SL G3

**Origin:** GBR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let ABC be a triangle with centroid G. Determine, with
proof, the position of the point P in the plane of ABC such that
AP \cdot AG + BP \cdot BG + CP \cdot CG
is a minimum, and express this minimum value in terms of the side lengths
of ABC.

## Solution

Let us investigate a more general problem, in which G is any point of the
plane such that AG, BG, CG are sides of a triangle.
Let F be the point in the plane such that BC : CF : FB = AG : BG : CG
and F, A lie on diﬀerent sides of BC. Then by Ptolemy’s inequality, on
BPCF we have AG \cdot AP + BG \cdot BP + CG \cdot CP = AG \cdot AP + AG
BC (CF \cdot
BP + BF \cdot CP) \geqAG \cdot AP + AG
BC BC \cdot PF. Hence
AG \cdot AP + BG \cdot BP + CG \cdot CP \geqAG \cdot AF,
(1)
where equality holds if and only if P lies on the segment AF and on the
circle BCF. Now we return to the case of G the centroid of \triangleABC.
We claim that F is then the point
<G in which the line AG meets again
the circumcircle of \triangleBGC. Indeed,
if M is the midpoint of AB, by
the law of sines we have
BC
C <G
=
sin \angleB <GC
sin \angleCB <G =
sin \angleBGM
sin \angleAGM =
AG
BG, and
similarly BC
B <G =
AG
CG. Thus (1) im-
plies
A
B
C
P
G
F
AG \cdot AP + BG \cdot BP + CG \cdot CP \geqAG \cdot A <G.
It is easily seen from the above considerations that equality holds if and
only if P \equivG, and then the (minimum) value of AG \cdot AP + BG \cdot BP +
CG \cdot CP equals

AG2 + BG2 + CG2 = a2 + b2 + c2
.
Second solution.
Notice that AG \cdot AP \geq−\to
AG \cdot −\to
AP = −\to
AG \cdot (−\to
AG + −−\to
PG).
Summing this inequality with analogous inequalities for BG \cdot BP and
CG \cdot CP gives us AG \cdot AP + BG \cdot BP + CG \cdot CP \geqAG2 + BG2 + CG2 +
(−\to
AG + −−\to
BG + −−\to
CG) \cdot −−\to
PG = AG2 + BG2 + CG2 = a2+b2+c2
. Equality holds
if and only if P \equivQ.
