---
title: "IMO 2001 SL G6"
description: "Let ABC be a triangle and P an exterior point in the plane"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2001
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 6
origin: "IND"
weight: 200103006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2001 SL G6

**Origin:** IND  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let ABC be a triangle and P an exterior point in the plane
of the triangle. Suppose AP, BP, CP meet the sides BC, CA, AB (or ex-
tensions thereof) in D, E, F, respectively. Suppose further that the areas
of triangles PBD, PCE, PAF are all equal. Prove that each of these areas
is equal to the area of triangle ABC itself.

## Solution

By Ceva’s theorem, we can choose real numbers x, y, z such that
−−\to
BD
−−\to
DC
= z
y ,
−−\to
CE
−\to
EA
= x
z , and
−\to
AF
−−\to
FB
= y
x.
The point P lies outside the triangle ABC if and only if x, y, z are not
all of the same sign. In what follows, SX will denote the signed area of a
ﬁgure X.
Let us assume that the area SABC of \triangleABC is 1. Since SPBC : SPCA :
SPAB
= x : y : z and SPBD : SPDC
= z : y, it follows that
SPBD =
z
y+z
x
x+y+z. Hence SPBD =
y(y+z)
xyz
x+y+z, SPCE =
z(z+x)
xyz
x+y+z,
SPAF =
x(x+y)
xyz
x+y+z. By the condition of the problem we have |SPBD| =
|SPCE| = |SPAF |, or
|x(x + y)| = |y(y + z)| = |z(z + x)|.
Obviously x, y, z are nonzero, so that we can put w.l.o.g. z = 1. At least
two of the numbers x(x+y), y(y +1), 1(1+x) are equal, so we can assume
that x(x + y) = y(y + 1). We distinguish two cases:
(i) x(x + y) = y(y + 1) = 1 + x. Then x = y2 + y −1, from which
we obtain (y2 + y −1)(y2 + 2y −1) = y(y + 1). Simpliﬁcation gives
y4 + 3y3 −y2 −4y + 1 = 0, or
(y −1)(y3 + 4y2 + 3y −1) = 0.
If y = 1, then also z = x = 1, so P is the centroid of \triangleABC, which
is not an exterior point. Hence y3 + 4y2 + 3y −1 = 0. Now the signed
area of each of the triangles PBD, PCE, PAF equals
SPAF =
yz
(x + y)(x + y + z)
=
y
(y2 + 2y −1)(y2 + 2y) =
y3 + 4y2 + 3y −2 = −1.
It is easy to check that not both of x, y are positive, implying that P
is indeed outside \triangleABC. This is the desired result.
(ii) x(x + y) = y(y + 1) = −1 −x. In this case we are led to
f(y) = y4 + 3y3 + y2 −2y + 1 = 0.
We claim that this equation has no real solutions. In fact, assume that
y0 is a real root of f(y). We must have y0 < 0, and hence u = −y0 > 0
satisﬁes 3u3 −u4 = (u + 1)2. On the other hand,

3u3 −u4 = u3(3 −u) = 4u
u
u

(3 −u)
\leq4u
u/2 + u/2 + 3 −u
3
= 4u
\leq(u + 1)2,
where at least one of the inequalities is strict, a contradiction.
Remark. The oﬃcial solution was incomplete, missing the case (ii).
