---
title: "IMO 2001 SL G7"
description: "Let O be an interior point of acute triangle ABC. Let A1"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2001
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 7
origin: "BUL"
weight: 200103007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2001 SL G7

**Origin:** BUL  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let O be an interior point of acute triangle ABC. Let A1
lie on BC with OA1 perpendicular to BC. Deﬁne B1 on CA and C1 on
AB similarly. Prove that O is the circumcenter of ABC if and only if
the perimeter of A1B1C1 is not less than any one of the perimeters of
AB1C1, BC1A1, and CA1B1.

## Solution

We denote by p(XY Z) the perimeter of a triangle XY Z.
If O is the circumcenter of \triangleABC, then A1, B1, C1 are the midpoints
of the corresponding sides of the triangle, and hence p(A1B1C1) =
p(AB1C1) = p(A1BC1) = p(A1B1C).
Conversely, suppose that p(A1B1C1) \geqp(AB1C1), p(A1BC1), p(A1B1C).
Let \alpha1, \alpha2, \beta1, \beta2, \gamma1, \gamma2 denote \angleB1A1C, \angleC1A1B, \angleC1B1A, \angleA1B1C,
\angleA1C1B, \angleB1C1A.
Suppose that \gamma1, \beta2 \geq\alpha. If A2 is the
fourth vertex of the parallelogram
B1AC1A2, then these conditions
imply that A1 is in the interior or on
the border of \triangleB1C1A2, and there-
fore p(A1B1C1) \leqp(A2B1C1) =
p(AB1C1). Moreover, if one of the
inequalities \gamma1 \geq\alpha, \beta2 \geq\alpha is strict,
then p(A1B1C1) is strictly less than
A
B
C
O
A1
B1
C1
A2
\alpha1
\beta1
\gamma1
\alpha2
\beta2
\gamma2
p(AB1C1), contrary to the assumption. Hence
\beta2 \geq\alpha =⇒\gamma1 \leq\alpha,
\gamma2 \geq\beta =⇒\alpha1 \leq\beta,
\alpha2 \geq\gamma =⇒\beta1 \leq\gamma,
(1)
the last two inequalities being obtained analogously to the ﬁrst one. Be-
cause of the symmetry, there is no loss of generality in assuming that
\gamma1 \leq\alpha. Then since \gamma1 + \alpha2 = 180◦−\beta = \alpha + \gamma, it follows that \alpha2 \geq\gamma.
From (1) we deduce \beta1 \leq\gamma, which further implies \gamma2 \geq\beta. Similarly, this
leads to \alpha1 \leq\beta and \beta2 \geq\alpha. To sum up,
\gamma1 \leq\alpha \leq\beta2,
\alpha1 \leq\beta \leq\gamma2,
\beta1 \leq\gamma \leq\alpha2.
Since OA1BC1 and OB1CA1 are cyclic, we have \angleA1OB = \gamma1 and
\angleA1OC = \beta2. Hence BO : CO = cos \beta2 : cos \gamma1, hence BO \leqCO.
Analogously, CO \leqAO and AO \leqBO. Therefore AO = BO = CO, i.e.,
O is the circumcenter of ABC.
