---
title: "IMO 2003 SL A1"
description: "Let aij, i = 1, 2, 3, j = 1, 2, 3, be real numbers such that aij"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 1
origin: "USA"
weight: 200301001
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL A1

**Origin:** USA  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Let aij, i = 1, 2, 3, j = 1, 2, 3, be real numbers such that aij
is positive for i = j and negative for i ̸= j.
Prove that there exist positive real numbers c1, c2, c3 such that the num-
bers
a11c1 + a12c2 + a13c3,
a21c1 + a22c2 + a23c3,
a31c1 + a32c2 + a33c3
are all negative, all positive, or all zero.

## Solution

Consider the points O(0, 0, 0), P(a11, a21, a31), Q(a12, a22, a32), R(a13, a23,
a33) in three-dimensional Euclidean space. It is enough to ﬁnd a point
U(u1, u2, u3) in the interior of the triangle PQR whose coordinates are
all positive, all negative, or all zero (indeed, then we have −−\to
OU = c1
−−\to
OP +
c2
−−\to
OQ + c3
−−\to
OR for some c1, c2, c3 > 0 with c1 + c2 + c3 = 1).
Let P ′(a11, a21, 0), Q′(a12, a22, 0), and R′(a13, a23, 0) be the projections
of P, Q, and R onto the Oxy plane. We see that P ′, Q′, R′ lie in the
fourth, second, and third quadrants, respectively. We have the following
two cases:
(i) O is in the exterior of \triangleP ′Q′R′.
Set S′ = OR′ \capP ′Q′ and let S
be the point of the segment PQ
that projects to S′. The point S
has its z coordinate negative (be-
cause the z coordinates of P and
Q are negative). Thus any point
y
x
O
R′
Q′
P ′
S′
of the segment SR suﬃciently close to S has all coordinates negative.
(ii) O is in the interior or on the boundary of \triangleP ′Q′R′.
Let T be the point in the plane PQR whose projection is O. If T = O,
then all coordinates of T are zero, and we are done. Otherwise O is
interior to \triangleP ′Q′R′. Suppose that the z coordinate of T is positive
(negative). Since x and y coordinates of T are equal to 0, there is a
point U inside PQR close to T with both x and y coordinates positive
(respectively negative), and this point U has all coordinates of the
same sign.
