---
title: "IMO 2003 SL A3"
description: 'Consider pairs of sequences of positive real numbers a1 \geq'
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 3
origin: "GEO"
weight: 200301003
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL A3

**Origin:** GEO  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Consider pairs of sequences of positive real numbers a1 \geq
a2 \geqa3 \geq\cdot \cdot \cdot , b1 \geqb2 \geqb3 \geq\cdot \cdot \cdot and the sums An = a1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an,
Bn = b1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + bn, n = 1, 2, . . . . For any pair deﬁne ci = min{ai, bi} and
Cn = c1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + cn, n = 1, 2, . . ..
(a) Does there exist a pair (ai)i\geq1, (bi)i\geq1 such that the sequences (An)n\geq1
and (Bn)n\geq1 are unbounded while the sequence (Cn)n\geq1 is bounded?
(b) Does the answer to question (1) change by assuming additionally that
bi = 1/i, i = 1, 2, . . .?
Justify your answer.

## Solution

(a) Given any sequence cn (in particular, such that Cn converges), we
shall construct an and bn such that An and Bn diverge.
First, choose n1 such that n1c1 > 1 and set a1 = a2 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = an1 =
c1: this uniquely determines b2 = c2, . . . , bn1 = cn1. Next, choose n2
such that (n2 −n1)cn1+1 > 1 and set bn1+1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = bn2 = cn1+1;
again an1+1, . . . , an2 is hereby determined. Then choose n3 with (n3 −
n2)cn2+1 > 1 and set an2+1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = an3 = cn2+1, and so on. It is plain
that in this way we construct decreasing sequences an, bn such that
 an and  bn diverge, since they contain an inﬁnity of subsums that
exceed 1; on the other hand, cn = min(an, bn) and Cn is convergent.
(b) The answer changes in this situation. Suppose to the contrary that
there is such a pair of sequences (an) and (bn). There are inﬁnitely
many indices i such that ci = bi (otherwise all but ﬁnitely many terms
of the sequence (cn) would be equal to the terms of the sequence (an),
which has an unbounded sum). Thus for any n0 \inN there is j \geq2n0
such that cj = bj. Then we have
j

k=n0
ck \geq
j

k=n0
cj = (j −n0)1
j \geq1
2.
Hence the sequence (Cn) is unbounded, a contradiction.
