---
title: "IMO 2003 SL C2"
description: "Let D1, . . . , Dn be closed disks in the plane. (A closed disk"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 2
origin: "GEO"
weight: 200302002
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL C2

**Origin:** GEO  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let D1, . . . , Dn be closed disks in the plane. (A closed disk
is a region bounded by a circle, taken jointly with this circle.) Suppose
that every point in the plane is contained in at most 2003 disks Di. Prove
that there exists disk Dk that intersects at most 7 \cdot 2003 −1 other disks
Di.

## Solution

Let S be the disk with the smallest radius, say s, and O the center of that
disk. Divide the plane into 7 regions: one bounded by disk s and 6 regions
T1, . . . , T6 shown in the ﬁgure.
Any of the disks diﬀerent from S,
say Dk, has its center in one of the
seven regions. If its center is inside
S then Dk contains point O. Hence
the number of disks diﬀerent from S
having their centers in S is at most
2002.
Consider a disk Dk that intersects
S and whose center is in the re-
gion Ti. Let Pi be the point such
that OPi bisects the region Ti and
OPi = s
\sqrt
3.
O
P1
P2
P6
P3
P4
P5
T1
T2
T6
T3
T4
T5
K
L
U6
V6
We claim that Dk contains Pi. Divide the region Ti by a line li through
Pi perpendicular to OPi into two regions Ui and Vi, where O and Ui are
on the same side of li. Let K be the center of Dk. Consider two cases:
(i) K \inUi. Since the disk with the center Pi and radius s contains Ui,
we see that KPi \leqs. Hence Dk contains Pi.
(ii) K \inVi. Denote by L the intersection point of the segment KO with
the circle s.
We want to prove that KL > KPi. It is enough to prove that
\angleKPiL > \angleKLPi. However, it is obvious that \angleLPiO \leq30◦and
\angleLOPi \leq30◦, hence \angleKLPi \leq60◦, while \angleNPiL = 90◦−\angleLPiO \geq
60◦. This implies that \angleKPiL \geq\angleNPiL \geq60◦\geq\angleKLPi (N is the
point on the edge of Ti as shown in the ﬁgure). Our claim is thus
proved.
Now we see that the number of disks with centers in Ti that intersect S
is less than or equal to 2003, and the total number of disks that intersect
S is not greater than 2002 + 6 \cdot 2003 = 7 \cdot 2003 −1.
