---
title: "IMO 2003 SL C6"
description: "Let f(k) be the number of integers n that satisfy the following"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 6
origin: "SAF"
weight: 200302006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL C6

**Origin:** SAF  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let f(k) be the number of integers n that satisfy the following
conditions:
(i) 0 \leqn < 10k, so n has exactly k digits (in decimal notation), with
leading zeros allowed;
(ii) the digits of n can be permuted in such a way that they yield an
integer divisible by 11.
Prove that f(2m) = 10f(2m −1) for every positive integer m.

## Solution

Denote by ak−1ak−2 . . . a0 the decimal representation of a number whose
digits are ak−1, . . . , a0. We will use the following well-known fact:
ak−1ak−2 . . . a0 \equivi (mod 11)
⇐⇒
k−1

l=0
(−1)lal \equivi (mod 11).
Let m be a positive integer. Deﬁne A as the set of integers n (0 \leqn <
102m) whose right 2m −1 digits can be so permuted to yield an integer
divisible by 11, and B as the set of integers n (0 \leqn < 102m−1) whose
digits can be permuted resulting in an integer divisible by 11.
Suppose that a = a2m−1 . . . a0 \inA. Then there that satisﬁes
2m−1

l=0
(−1)lbl \equiv0 (mod 11).
(1)
The 2m-tuple (b2m−1, . . . , b0) satisﬁes (1) if and only if the 2m-tuple
(kb2m−1 + l, . . . , kb0 + l) satisﬁes (1), where k, l \inZ, 11 ∤k.
Since a0 + 1 ̸\equiv0 (mod 11), we can choose k from the set {1, . . . , 10} such
that (a0 + 1)k \equiv1 (mod 11). Thus there is a permutation of the 2m-tuple
((a2m−1+1)k−1, . . ., (a1+1)k−1, 0) satisfying (1). Interchanging odd and
even positions if necessary, we may assume that this permutation keeps
the 0 at the last position. Since (ai + 1)k is not divisible by 11 for any i,
there is a unique bi \in{0, 1, . . ., 9} such that bi \equiv(ai + 1)k −1 (mod 11).
Hence the number b2m−1 . . . b1 belongs to B.
Thus for ﬁxed a0 \in{0, 1, 2, . . ., 9}, to each a \inA such that the last
digit of a is a0 we associate a unique b \inB. Conversely, having a0 \in
{0, 1, 2, . . ., 9} ﬁxed, from any number b2m−1 . . . b1 \inB we can reconstruct
a2m−1 . . . a1a0 \inA. Hence |A| = 10|B|, i.e., f(2m) = 10f(2m −1).
