---
title: "IMO 2003 SL G5"
description: "Let ABC be an isosceles triangle with AC = BC, whose"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 5
origin: "KOR"
weight: 200303005
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL G5

**Origin:** KOR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let ABC be an isosceles triangle with AC = BC, whose
incenter is I. Let P be a point on the circumcircle of the triangle AIB
lying inside the triangle ABC. The lines through P parallel to CA and
CB meet AB at D and E, respectively. The line through P parallel to
AB meets CA and CB at F and G, respectively. Prove that the lines DF
and EG intersect on the circumcircle of the triangle ABC.

## Solution

The triangles PDE and CFG are homothetic; hence lines FD, GE, and
CP intersect at one point. Let Q be the intersection point of the line CP
and the circumcircle of \triangleABC. The required statement will follow if we
show that Q lies on the lines GE and FD.
Since \angleCFG = \angleCBA = \angleCQA, the quadrilateral AQPF is cyclic.
Analogously, BQPG is cyclic. However, the isosceles trapezoid BDPG is
also cyclic; it follows that B, Q, D, P, G lie on a circle. Therefore we get
\anglePQF = \anglePAC, \anglePQD = \anglePBA.
(1)
Since I is the incenter of \triangleABC,
we have \angleCAI
=
2\angleCAB
=
2\angleCBA = \angleIBA; hence CA is the
tangent at A to the circumcircle of
\triangleABI. This implies that \anglePAC =
\anglePBA, and it follows from (1) that
\anglePQF = \anglePQD, i.e., that F, D, Q
are also collinear. Similarly, G, E, Q
are collinear and the claim is thus
proved.
A
B
C
I
P
D
E
G
F
Q
