---
title: "IMO 2003 SL G7"
description: "Let ABC be a triangle with semiperimeter s and inradius"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 7
origin: "SAF"
weight: 200303007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL G7

**Origin:** SAF  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let ABC be a triangle with semiperimeter s and inradius
r. The semicircles with diameters BC, CA, AB are drawn outside of the
triangle ABC. The circle tangent to all three semicircles has radius t.
Prove that
s
2 < t \leqs
2 +
1 −
\sqrt
r.

## Solution

Let D, E, F be the midpoints of BC, CA, AB, respectively. We construct
smaller semicircles \Gammad, \Gammae, \Gammaf inside \triangleABC with centers D, E, F and radii
d = s−a
2 , e = s−b
2 , f = s−c
respectively. Since DE = d + e, DF = d + f,
and EF = e + f, we deduce that \Gammad, \Gammae, and \Gammaf touch each other at the
points D1, E1, F1 of tangency of the incircle \gamma of \triangleDEF with its sides
(D1 \inEF, etc.). Consider the circle \Gammag with center O and radius g that
lies inside \triangleDEF and tangents \Gammad, \Gammae, \Gammaf.

Now let
OD, OE, OF
meet
the
semicircles \Gammad, \Gammae, \Gammaf at D′, E′, F ′
respectively. We have OD′ = OD +
DD′ = g + d + a
2 = g + s
2 and sim-
ilarly OE′ = OF ′ = g + s
2. It fol-
lows that the circle with center O
and radius g + s
2 touches all three
semicircles, and consequently t =
g + s
2 > s
2. Now set the coordinate
system such that we have the points
D1(0, 0), E(−e, 0), F(f, 0) and such
A
B
C
D
E
F
D1
E1
F1
D′
E′
F ′
\gammad
\gammae
\gammaf
\Gammad
\Gammae
\Gammaf
that the y coordinate of D is positive.
Apply the inversion with center D1 and unit radius. This inversion maps
the circles \Gammae and \Gammaf to the lines @
\Gammae
/
x = −1
2e
and @
\Gammae

x =
2f

respec-
tively, and the circle \gamma goes to the line <\gamma
/
y = 1
r
. The images @
\Gammad and @
\Gammag
of \Gammad, \Gammag are the circles that touch the lines @
\Gammae and @
\Gammaf. Since @
\Gammad, @
\Gammag are
perpendicular to \gamma, they have radii equal to R =
4e +
4f and centers
at

−1
4e +
4f , 1
r

and

−1
4e +
4f , 1
r + 2R

respectively. Let p and P be
the distances from D1(0, 0) to the centers of \Gammag and @
\Gammag respectively. We
have that P 2 =

4e −
4f
+
 1
r + 2R
2, and that the circles \Gammag and @
\Gammag
are homothetic with center of homothety D1; hence p/P = g/R. On the
other hand, @
\Gammag is the image of \Gammag under inversion; hence the product of
the tangents from D1 to these two circles is equal to 1. In other words, we
obtain

p2 −g2 \cdot
\sqrt
P 2 −R2 = 1. Using the relation p/P = g/R we get
g =
R
P 2−R2 .
The inequality we have to prove is equivalent to (4 + 2
\sqrt
3)g \leqr. This can
be proved as follows:
r −(4 + 2
\sqrt
3)g = r(P 2 −R2 −(4 + 2
\sqrt
3)R/r)
P 2 −R2
=
r
 1
r + 2R
2 +

4e −
4f
−R2 −(4 + 2
\sqrt
3) R
r

P 2 −R2
=
r
P 2 −R2


R
\sqrt
3 −1
r
2
+
 1
4e −1
4f
2
\geq0.
Remark. One can obtain a symmetric formula for g:
2g =
s −a +
s −b +
s −c + 2
r .
