---
title: "IMO 2003 SL N4"
description: "Let b be an integer greater than 5. For each positive integer"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 4
origin: "ROM"
weight: 200304004
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL N4

**Origin:** ROM  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Let b be an integer greater than 5. For each positive integer
n, consider the number
xn = 11 . . .1
  
nŌłÆ1
22 . . .2
  
n
5,
written in base b. Prove that the following condition holds if and only if
b = 10: There exists a positive integer M such that for every integer n
greater than M, the number xn is a perfect square.

## Solution

Assume that b \geq6 has the required property. Consider the sequence
yn = (b ŌłÆ1)xn. From the de’¼ünition of xn we easily ’¼ünd that yn = b2n +
bn+1 + 3b ŌłÆ5. Then ynyn+1 = (b ŌłÆ1)2xnxn+1 is a perfect square for all
n > M. Also, straightforward calculation implies

b2n+1 + bn+2 + bn+1
ŌłÆb3
2
< ynyn+1 <

b2n+1 + bn+2 + bn+1
+ b3
2
.
Hence for every n > M there is an integer an such that |an| < b3 and
ynyn+1 =

b2n + bn+1 + 3b ŌłÆ5
 
b2n+2 + bn+2 + 3b ŌłÆ5

=

b2n+1 + bn+1(b + 1)
+ an
2
.
(1)
Now considering this equation modulo bn we obtain (3b ŌłÆ5)2 \equiva2
n, so
that assuming that n > 3 we get an = \pm(3b ŌłÆ5).
If an = 3b ŌłÆ5, then substituting in (1) yields 1
4b2n(b4 ŌłÆ14b3 + 45b2 ŌłÆ
52b + 20) = 0, with the unique positive integer solution b = 10. Also, if
an = ŌłÆ3b + 5, we similarly obtain 1
4b2n(b4 ŌłÆ14b3 ŌłÆ3b2 + 28b + 20) ŌłÆ
2bn+1(3b2 ŌłÆ2b ŌłÆ5) = 0 for each n, which is impossible.
For b = 10 it is easy to show that xn =
 10n+5
2 for all n. This proves
the statement.
Second solution. In problems of this type, computing zn = \sqrtxn asymp-
totically usually works.
From limn\to\infty
b2n
(bŌłÆ1)xn = 1 we infer that limn\to\inftybn
zn =
\sqrt
b ŌłÆ1. Further-
more, from (bzn + zn+1)(bzn ŌłÆzn+1) = b2xn ŌłÆxn+1 = bn+2 + 3b2 ŌłÆ2b ŌłÆ5
we obtain
lim
n\to\infty(bzn ŌłÆzn+1) = b
\sqrt
b ŌłÆ1
.
Since the znŌĆÖs are integers for all n \geqM, we conclude that bzn ŌłÆzn+1 =
b
\sqrt
bŌłÆ1
for all n su’¼āciently large. Hence b ŌłÆ1 is a perfect square, and
moreover b divides 2zn+1 for all large n. It follows that b | 10; hence the
only possibility is b = 10.
