---
title: "IMO 2003 SL N5"
description: "An integer n is said to be good if |n| is not the square of"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 5
origin: "KOR"
weight: 200304005
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL N5

**Origin:** KOR  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

An integer n is said to be good if |n| is not the square of
an integer. Determine all integers m with the following property: m can
be represented in inﬁnitely many ways as a sum of three distinct good
integers whose product is the square of an odd integer.

## Solution

Suppose that m = u+v+w where u, v, w are good integers whose product
is a perfect square of an odd integer. Since uvw is an odd perfect square,
we have that uvw \equiv1 (mod 4). Thus either two or none of the numbers

u, v, w are congruent to 3 modulo 4. In both cases u + v + w \equiv3 (mod 4).
Hence m \equiv3 (mod 4).
Now we shall prove the converse: every m \equiv3 (mod 4) has inﬁnitely many
representations of the desired type. Let m = 4k + 3. We shall represent m
in the form
4k + 3 = xy + yz + zx,
for x, y, z odd.
(1)
The product of the summands is an odd square. Set x = 1 + 2l and
y = 1 −2l. In order to satisfy (1), z must satisfy z = 2l2 + 2k + 1. The
summands xy, yz, zx are distinct except for ﬁnitely many l, so it remains
only to prove that for inﬁnitely many integers l, |xy|, |yz|, and |zx| are not
perfect squares. First, observe that |xy| = 4l2 −1 is not a perfect square
for any l ̸= 0.
Let p, q > m be ﬁxed diﬀerent prime numbers. The system of congruences
1 + 2l \equivp (mod p2) and 1 −2l \equivq (mod q2) has inﬁnitely many solutions
l by the Chinese remainder theorem. For any such l, the number z =
2l2 + 2k + 1 is divisible by neither p nor q, and hence |xz| (respectively
|yz|) is divisible by p, but not by p2 (respectively by q, but not by q2).
Thus xz and yz are also good numbers.
