---
title: "IMO 2003 SL N7"
description: "The sequence a0, a1, a2, . . . is deﬁned as follows:"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 7
origin: "BRA"
weight: 200304007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL N7

**Origin:** BRA  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

The sequence a0, a1, a2, . . . is deﬁned as follows:
a0 = 2,
ak+1 = 2a2
k −1
for k \geq0.
Prove that if an odd prime p divides an, then 2n+3 divides p2 −1.

## Solution

Deﬁne the sequence xk of positive reals by ak = cosh xk (cosh is the
hyperbolic cosine deﬁned by cosh t = et+e−t
). Since cosh(2xk) = 2a2
k−1 =
cosh xk+1, it follows that xk+1 = 2xk and thus xk = \lambda\cdot2k for some \lambda > 0.
From the condition a0 = 2 we obtain \lambda = log(2 +
\sqrt
3). Therefore
an = (2 +
\sqrt
3)2n + (2 −
\sqrt
3)2n
.

Let p be a prime number such that p | an. We distinguish the following
two cases:
(i) There exists an m \inZ such that m2 \equiv3 (mod p). Then we have
(2 + m)2n + (2 −m)2n \equiv0 (mod p).
(1)
Since (2 + m)(2 −m) = 4 −m2 \equiv1 (mod p), multiplying both sides
of (1) by (2 + m)2n gives (2 + m)2n+1 \equiv−1 (mod p). It follows that
the multiplicative order of (2 + m) modulo p is 2n+2, or 2n+2 | p −1,
which implies that 2n+3 | (p −1)(p + 1) = p2 −1.
(ii) m2 \equiv3 (mod p) has no integer solutions. We will work in the algebraic
extension Zp(
\sqrt
3) of the ﬁeld Zp. In this ﬁeld
\sqrt
3 plays the role of m,
so as in the previous case we obtain (2 +
\sqrt
3)2n+1 = −1; i.e., the order
of 2 +
\sqrt
3 in the multiplicative group Zp(
\sqrt
3)∗is 2n+2. We cannot
ﬁnish the proof as in the previous case: in fact, we would conclude
only that 2n+2 divides the order p2 −1 of the group. However, it will
be enough to ﬁnd a u \inZp(
\sqrt
3) such that u2 = 2 +
\sqrt
3, since then the
order of u is equal to 2n+3.
Note that (1 +
\sqrt
3)2 = 2(2 +
\sqrt
3). Thus it is suﬃcient to prove that
2 is a perfect square in Zp(
\sqrt
3). But we know that in this ﬁeld an =
0 = 2a2
n−1 −1, and hence 2a2
n−1 = 1 which implies 1
2 = a2
n−1. This
completes the proof.
