---
title: "IMO 2003 SL N8"
description: "Let p be a prime number and let A be a set of positive integers"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2003
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 8
origin: "IRN"
weight: 200304008
draft: false
---

# IMO 2003 SL N8

**Origin:** IRN  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Let p be a prime number and let A be a set of positive integers
that satisﬁes the following conditions:
(i) the set of prime divisors of the elements in A consists of p−1 elements;
(ii) for any nonempty subset of A, the product of its elements is not a
perfect pth power.
What is the largest possible number of elements in A?

## Solution

Let p1, p2, . . . , pr be distinct primes, where r = p −1. Consider the sets
Bi = {pi, pp+1
i
, . . . , p(r−1)p+1
i
} and B = %r
i=1 Bi. Then B has (p −1)2
elements and satisﬁes (i) and (ii).
Now suppose that |A| \geqr2 + 1 and that A satisﬁes (i) and (ii), and let
{t1, . . . , tr2+1} be distinct elements of A, where tj = p
\alphaj1
\cdot p
\alphaj2
\cdot \cdot \cdot p\alphajr
r
.
We shall show that the product of some elements of A is a perfect pth
power, i.e., that there exist \tauj \in{0, 1} (1 \leqj \leqr2 + 1), not all equal to
0, such that T = t\tau1
1 \cdot t\tau2
2 \cdot \cdot \cdot t
\taur2+1
r2+1 is a pth power. This is equivalent to the
condition that
r2+1

j=1
\alphaij\tauj \equiv0 (mod p)
holds for all i = 1, . . . , r.
By Fermat’s theorem it is suﬃcient to ﬁnd integers x1, . . . , xr2+1, not all
zero, such that the relation
r2+1

j=1
\alphaijxr
j \equiv0 (mod p)
is satisﬁed for all i \in{1, . . . , r}. Set Fi = r2+1
j=1 \alphaijxr
j. We want to ﬁnd
x1, . . . , xr such that F1 \equivF2 \equiv\cdot \cdot \cdot \equivFr \equiv0 (mod p), which is by
Fermat’s theorem equivalent to

F(x1, . . . , xr) = F r
1 + F r
2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + F r
r \equiv0 (mod p).
(1)
Of course, one solution of (1) is (0, . . . , 0): we are not satisﬁed with it
because it generates the empty subset of A, but it tells us that (1) has at
least one solution.
We shall prove that the number of solutions of (1) is divisible by p, which
will imply the existence of a nontrivial solution and thus complete the
proof. To do this, consider the sum  F(x1, . . . , xr2+1)r taken over all
vectors (x1, . . . , xr2+1) in the vector space Zr2+1
p
. Our statement is equiv-
alent to

F(x1, . . . , xr2+1)r \equiv0 (mod p).
(2)
Since the degree of F r is r2, in each monomial in F r at least one of the
variables is missing. Consider any of these monomials, say bxa1
i1 xa2
i2 \cdot \cdot \cdot xak
ik .
Then the sum  bxa1
i1 xa2
i2 \cdot \cdot \cdot xak
ik , taken over the set of all vectors
(x1, . . . , xr2+1) \inZr2+1
p
, is equal to
pr2+1−u \cdot

(xi1,...,xik)\inZkp
bxa1
i1 xa2
i2 \cdot \cdot \cdot xak
ik ,
which is divisible by p, so that (2) is proved. Thus the answer is (p −1)2.
