---
title: "IMO 1991 SL 13"
description: "Given any integer n \geq2, assume that the integers a1, a2, . . . , an"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1991
type: "shortlist"
number: 13
origin: "POL"
weight: 199100013
draft: false
---

# IMO 1991 SL 13

**Origin:** POL

## Problem

Given any integer n \geq2, assume that the integers a1, a2, . . . , an
are not divisible by n and, moreover, that n does not divide a1 + a2 +
\cdot \cdot \cdot+an. Prove that there exist at least n diﬀerent sequences (e1, e2, \cdot \cdot \cdot , en)
consisting of zeros or ones such that e1a1 + e2a2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + enan is divisible
by n.

## Solution

Call a sequence e1, . . . , en good if e1a1+\cdot \cdot \cdot+enan is divisible by n. Among
the sums s0 = 0, s1 = a1, s2 = a1 + a2, . . . , sn = a1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an, two give
the same remainder modulo n, and their diﬀerence corresponds to a good
sequence. To show that, permuting the ai’s, we can ﬁnd n −1 diﬀerent
sequences, we use the following
Lemma. Let A be a k\timesn (k \leqn−2) matrix of zeros and ones, whose every
row contains at least one 0 and at least two 1’s. Then it is possible to
permute columns of A is such a way that in any row 1’s do not form
a block.
Proof.
We will use the induction on k. The case k = 1 and arbitrary
n \geq3 is trivial. Suppose that k \geq2 and that for k −1 and any
n \geqk + 1 the lemma is true. Consider a k \times n matrix A, n \geqk + 2.
We mark an element aij if either it is the only zero in the i-th row,
or one of the 1’s in the row if it contains exactly two 1’s. Since n \geq4,
every row contains at most two marked elements, which adds up to
at most 2k < 2n marked elements in total. It follows that there is a
column with at most one marked element. Assume w.l.o.g. that it is
the ﬁrst column and that a1j isn’t marked for j > 1. The matrix B,
obtained by omitting the ﬁrst row and ﬁrst column from A, satisﬁes
the conditions of the lemma. Therefore, we can permute columns of
B and get the required form. Considered as a permutation of column
of A, this permutation may leave a block of 1’s only in the ﬁrst row
of A. In the case that it is so, if a11 = 1 we put the ﬁrst column in
the last place, otherwise we put it between any two columns having
1’s in the ﬁrst row. The obtained matrix has the required property.
Suppose now that we have got k diﬀerent nontrivial good sequences
ei
1, . . . , ei
n, i = 1, . . . , k, and that k \leqn −2. The matrix A = (ei
j)

fulﬁls the conditions of Lemma, hence there is a permutation \sigma from
Lemma. Now among the sums s0 = 0, s1 = a\sigma(1), s2 = a\sigma(1) + a\sigma(2),
. . . , sn = a\sigma(1) + \cdot \cdot \cdot + a\sigma(n), two give the same remainder modulo n. Let
sp \equivsq (mod n), p < q. Then n | sq −sp = a\sigma(p+1) + \cdot \cdot \cdot + a\sigma(q), and
this yields a good sequence e1, . . . , en with e\sigma(p+1) = \cdot \cdot \cdot = e\sigma(q) = 1 and
other e’s equal to zero. Since from the construction we see that none of
the sequences e\sigma(j)i has all 1’s in a block, in this way we have got a new
nontrivial good sequence, and we can continue this procedure until there
are n −1 sequences. Together with the trivial 0, . . . , 0 sequence, we have
found n good sequences.
