---
title: "IMO 1991 SL 2"
description: "For an acute triangle ABC, M is the midpoint of the segment"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1991
type: "shortlist"
number: 2
origin: "JAP"
weight: 199100002
draft: false
---

# IMO 1991 SL 2

**Origin:** JAP

## Problem

For an acute triangle ABC, M is the midpoint of the segment
BC, P is a point on the segment AM such that PM = BM, H is the foot
of the perpendicular line from P to BC, Q is the point of intersection of
segment AB and the line passing through H that is perpendicular to PB,
and ﬁnally, R is the point of intersection of the segment AC and the line
passing through H that is perpendicular to PC.
Show that the circumcircle of \triangleQHR is tangent to the side BC at point
H.

## Solution

Let HQ meet PB at Q′ and HR meet PC at R′. From MP = MB = MC
we have \angleBPC = 90o. So PR′HQ′
is a rectangle. Since PH is perpen-
dicular to BC, it follows that the
circle with diameter PH, through
P, R′, H, Q′, is tangent to BC. It is
now suﬃcient to show that QR is
parallel to Q′R′. Let CP meet AB
at X, and BP meet AC at Y . Since
P is on the median, it follows (for
example, by Ceva’s theorem) that
A
B
C
P
M
X
Q
Y
R
Q′
R′
H
AX/XB = AY/Y C, i.e. that XY is parallel to BC. Consequently,
PY/BP = PX/CP. Since HQ is parallel to CX, we have QQ′/HQ′ =
PX/CP and similarly RR′/HR′ = PY/BP. It follows that QQ′/HQ′ =
RR′/HR′, hence QR is parallel to Q′R′ as required.
Second solution. It suﬃces to show that \angleRHC = \angleRQH, or equivalently
RH : QH = PC : PB. We assume PC : PB = 1 : x. Let X \inAB and
Y \inAC be points such that MX \perpPB and MY \perpPC. Since MX
bisects \angleAMB and MY bisects AMC, we deduce
AX : XB = AM : MB = AY : Y C ⇒XY \parallelBC ⇒
⇒\triangleXY M ∼\triangleCBP ⇒XM : MY = 1 : x.
Now from CH : HB = 1 : x2 we obtain RH : MY = CH : CM = 1 : 1+x2
and QH : MX = BH : BM = x2 : 1+x2
. Therefore
RH : QH =
1 + x2 MY :
2x2
1 + x2 MX = 1 : x.
