---
title: "IMO 1991 SL 22"
description: "Real constants a, b, c are such that there is exactly one square"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1991
type: "shortlist"
number: 22
origin: "USA"
weight: 199100022
draft: false
---

# IMO 1991 SL 22

**Origin:** USA

## Problem

Real constants a, b, c are such that there is exactly one square
all of whose vertices lie on the cubic curve y = x3 + ax2 + bx + c. Prove
that the square has sides of length
4\sqrt
72.

## Solution

Suppose w.l.o.g. that the center of the square is at the origin O(0, 0). We
denote the curve y = f(x) = x3 + ax2 + bx + c by \gamma and the vertices of
the square by A, B, C, D in this order.
At ﬁrst, the symmetry with respect to the point O maps \gamma into the curve
\gamma (y = f(−x) = x3 −ax2 + bx −c). Obviously \gamma also passes through
A, B, C, D, and thus has four diﬀerent intersection points with \gamma. Then
2ax2 + 2c has at least four distinct solution, which implies a = c = 0.
Particularly, \gamma passes through O and intersects all quadrants, and hence
b < 0.
Further, the curve \gamma′, obtained by rotation of \gamma around O for 90◦, has an
equation −x = f(y) and also contains the points A, B, C, D and O. The
intersection points (x, y) of \gamma \cap\gamma′ are determined by −x = f(f(x)), and
hence they are roots of a polynomial p(x) = f(f(x)) + x of 9-th degree.

But the number of times that one cubic actually crosses the other in each
quadrant is in the general case even (draw the picture!), and since ABCD
is the only square lying on \gamma \cap\gamma′, the intersection points A, B, C, D must
be double. It follows that
p(x) = x[(x −r)(x + r)(x −s)(x + s)]2,
(1)
where r, s are the x-coordinates of A and B. On the other hand, p(x) is
deﬁned by (x3+bx)3+b(x3+bx)+x, and therefore equating of coeﬃcients
with (1) yields
3b = −2(r2 + s2),
3b2 = (r2 + s2)2 + 2r2s2,
b(b2 + 1) = −2r2s2(r2 + s2),
b2 + 1 = r4s4.
Straightforward solving this system of equations gives b = −
\sqrt
8 and r2 +
s2 =
\sqrt
18.
The line segment from O to (r, s) is half a diagonal of the square, and
thus a side of the square has length a =

2(r2 + s2) =
4\sqrt
72.
