---
title: "IMO 1991 SL 29"
description: "We call a set S on the real line R superinvariant if for any"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1991
type: "shortlist"
number: 29
origin: "FIN"
weight: 199100029
draft: false
---

# IMO 1991 SL 29

**Origin:** FIN

## Problem

We call a set S on the real line R superinvariant if for any
stretching A of the set by the transformation taking x to A(x) = x0 +
a(x −x0) there exists a translation B, B(x) = x + b, such that the images
of S under A and B agree; i.e., for any x \inS there is a y \inS such that
A(x) = B(y) and for any t \inS there is a u \inS such that B(t) = A(u).
Determine all superinvariant sets.
Remark. It is assumed that a > 0.

## Solution

One easily observes that the following sets are super-invariant: one-point
set, its complement, closed and open half-lines or their complements, and
the whole real line. To show that these are the only possibilities, we ﬁrst
observe that S is super-invariant if and only if for each a > 0 there is a b
such that x \inS ⇔ax + b \inS.
(i) Suppose that for some a there are two such b’s: b1 and b2. Then x \in
S ⇔ax + b1 \inS and x \inS ⇔ax + b2 \inS, which implies that S is
periodic: y \inS ⇔y + b1−b2
a
\inS. Since S is identical to a translate of
any stretching of S, all positive numbers are periods of S. Therefore
S \equivR.
(ii) Assume that, for each a, b = f(a) is unique. Then for any a1 and a2,
x \inS ⇔a1x + f(a1) \inS ⇔a1a2x + a2f(a1) + f(a2) \inS
⇔a2x + f(a2) \inS ⇔a1a2x + a1f(a2) + f(a1) \inS.
As above it follows that a1f(a2)+f(a1) = a2f(a1)+f(a2), or equiva-
lently f(a1)(a2−1) = f(a2)(a1−1). Hence (for some c), f(a) = c(a−1)
for all a. Now x \inS ⇔ax + c(a −1) \inS actually means that
y −c \inS ⇔ay −c \inS for all a. Then it is easy to conclude that
{y −c | y \inS} is either a half-line or the whole line, and so is S.
