---
title: "IMO 1991 SL 3"
description: "Let S be any point on the circumscribed circle of \trianglePQR. Then"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1991
type: "shortlist"
number: 3
origin: "PRK"
weight: 199100003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1991 SL 3

**Origin:** PRK

## Problem

Let S be any point on the circumscribed circle of \trianglePQR. Then
the feet of the perpendiculars from S to the three sides of the triangle lie
on the same straight line. Denote this line by l(S, PQR). Suppose that
the hexagon ABCDEF is inscribed in a circle. Show that the four lines
l(A, BDF), l(B, ACE), l(D, ABF), and l(E, ABC) intersect at one point
if and only if CDEF is a rectangle.

## Solution

Consider the problem with the unit circle on the complex plane. For conve-
nience, we use the same letter for a point in the plane and its corresponding
complex number.
Lemma 1. Line l(S, PQR) contains the point Z = P +Q+R+S
.

Proof.
Suppose P ′, Q′, R′ are the feet of perpendiculars from S to QR,
RP, PQ respectively. It suﬃces to show that P ′, Q′, R′, Z are on the
same line. Let us ﬁrst represent P ′ by Q, R, S. Since P ′ \inQR, we
have P ′−Q
R−Q =

P ′−Q
R−Q

, that is,
(P ′ −Q)(R −Q) = (P ′ −Q)(R −Q).
(1)
On the other hand, since SP ′ \perpQR, the ratio P ′−S
R−Q is purely imagi-
nary. Thus
(P ′ −S)(R −Q) = −(P ′ −S)(R −Q).
(2)
Eliminating P ′ from (1) and (2) and using the fact that X = X−1
for X on the unit circle, we obtain P ′ = (Q + R + S −QR/S)/2 and
analogously Q′ = (P + R + S −PR/S)/2 and R′ = (P + Q + S −
PQ/S)/2. Hence Z −P ′ = (P + QR/S)/2, Z −Q′ = (Q + PR/S)/2
and Z −R′ = (R + PQ/S)/2. Setting P = p2, Q = q2, R = r2,
S = s2 we obtain Z −P ′ = pqr
2s

ps
qr + qr
ps

, Z −Q′ = pqr
2s

qs
pr + pr
qs

and Z −P ′ = pqr
2s

rs
pq + pq
rs

.
Since x + x−1 = 2Re x is real for all x on the unit circle, it follows
that the ratio of every pair of these diﬀerences is real, which means
that Z, P ′, Q′, R′ belong to the same line.
Lemma 2. If P, Q, R, S are four diﬀerent points on a circle, then the lines
l(P, QRS), l(Q, RSP), l(R, SPQ), l(S, PQR) intersect at one point.
Proof. By Lemma 1, they all pass through P +Q+R+S
.
Now we can ﬁnd the needed conditions for A, B, . . . , F. In fact, the
lines l(A, BDF), l(D, ABF) meet at Z1 = A+B+D+F
, and l(B, ACE),
l(E, ABC) meet at Z2 =
A+B+C+E
. Hence, Z1 \equivZ2 if and only if
D −C = E −F ⇔CDEF is a rectangle.
Remark. The line l(S, PQR) is widely known as Simson line; the proof
that the feet of perpendiculars are collinear is straightforward. The key
claim, Lemma 1, is a known property of Simson lines, and can be shown
elementarily:
∗l(S, PQR) passes through the midpoint X of HS, where H is the
orthocenter of PQR.
