---
title: "IMO 1991 SL 9"
description: "In the plane we are given a set E of 1991 points, and certain"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1991
type: "shortlist"
number: 9
origin: "FRA"
weight: 199100009
draft: false
---

# IMO 1991 SL 9

**Origin:** FRA

## Problem

In the plane we are given a set E of 1991 points, and certain
pairs of these points are joined with a path. We suppose that for every
point of E, there exist at least 1593 other points of E to which it is joined
by a path. Show that there exist six points of E every pair of which are
joined by a path.
Alternative version. Is it possible to ﬁnd a set E of 1991 points in the
plane and paths joining certain pairs of the points in E such that every
point of E is joined with a path to at least 1592 other points of E, and
in every subset of six points of E there exist at least two points that are
not joined?

## Solution

Let A1, A2 be two points of E which are joined. In E \ {A1, A2}, there
are at most 397 points to which A1 is not joined, and at most as much
to which A2 is not joined. Consequently, there exists a point A3 which
is joined to both A1 and A2. There are at most 3 \cdot 397 = 1191 points of
E \ {A1, A2, A3} to which at least one of A1, A2, A3 is not joined, hence
it is possible to choose a point A4 joined to A1, A2, A3. Similarly, there
exists a point A5 which is joined to all A1, A2, A3, A4. Finally, among the
remaining 1986 points, there are at most 5 \cdot 397 = 1985 which are not
joined to one of the points A1, . . . , A5. Thus there is at least one point A6
joined to all A1, . . . , A5. It is clear that A1, . . . , A6 are pairwise joined.
Solution of the alternative version.
Let be given 1991 points instead.
Number the points from 1 to 1991, and join i and j if and only if i −j
is not a multiple of 5. Then each i is joined to 1592 or 1593 other points,
and obviously among any six points there are two which are not joined.
