---
title: "IMO 1982 SL 13"
description: "C1 (NET 1)IMO2 A scalene triangle A1A2A3 is given with sides a1, a2, a3"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1982
type: "shortlist"
number: 13
origin: ""
weight: 198200013
draft: false
---

# IMO 1982 SL 13

## Problem

C1 (NET 1)IMO2 A scalene triangle A1A2A3 is given with sides a1, a2, a3
(ai is the side opposite to Ai). For all i = 1, 2, 3, Mi is the midpoint of side
ai, Ti is the point where the incircle touches side ai, and the reﬂection of
Ti in the interior bisector of Ai yields the point Si. Prove that the lines
M1S1, M2S2, and M3S3 are concurrent.

## Solution

Points S1, S2, S3 clearly lie on the inscribed circle. Let :
XY
denote the oriented arc XY . The
arcs 
T2S1 and 
T1T3 are equal, since
they are symmetric with respect
to the bisector of \angleA1. Similarly,

T3T2 = 
S2T1. Therefore 
T3S1 =

T3T2 + 
T2S1
=

S2T1 + 
T1T3
=

S2T3. It follows that S1S2 is parallel
to A1A2, and consequently S1S2 \parallel
M1M2. Analogously S1S3 \parallelM1M3
A1
A2
A3
S1
S2
S3
T1
T2
T3
and S2S3 \parallelM2M3.
Since the circumcircles of \triangleM1M2M3 and \triangleS1S2S3 are not equal, these
triangles are not congruent and hence they must be homothetic. Then all
the lines MiSi pass through the center of homothety.
Second solution. Set the complex plane so that the incenter of \triangleA1A2A3
is the unit circle centered at the origin. Let ti, si respectively denote the
complex numbers of modulus 1 corresponding to Ti, Si. Clearly t1t1 =

t2t2 = t3t3 = 1. Since T2T3 and T1S1 are parallel, we obtain t2t3 = t1s1,
or s1 = t2t3t1. Similarly s2 = t1t3t2, s3 = t1t2t3, from which it follows
that s2 −s3 = t1(t3t2 −t2t3). Since the number in parentheses is strictly
imaginary, we conclude that OT1 \perpS2S3 and consequently S2S3 \parallelA2A3.
We proceed as in the ﬁrst solution.
