---
title: "IMO 1982 SL 3"
description: "A3 (USS 4)IMO3 Consider the in’¼ünite sequences {xn} of positive real"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1982
type: "shortlist"
number: 3
origin: ""
weight: 198200003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1982 SL 3

## Problem

A3 (USS 4)IMO3 Consider the in’¼ünite sequences {xn} of positive real
numbers with the following properties:
x0 = 1
and for all
i \geq0, xi+1 \leqxi.
(a) Prove that for every such sequence there is an n \geq1 such that x2
x1 +
x2
x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot +
x2
nŌłÆ1
xn
\geq3.999.
(b) Find such a sequence for which x2
x1 + x2
x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot +
x2
nŌłÆ1
xn
< 4 for all n.

## Solution

(a) By the CauchyŌĆōSchwarz inequality we have

x2
0/x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + x2
nŌłÆ1/xn

\cdot
(x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xn) \geq(x0 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + xnŌłÆ1)2. Let us set XnŌłÆ1 = x1 + x2 +
\cdot \cdot \cdot + xnŌłÆ1. Using x0 = 1, the last inequality can be rewritten as
x2
x1
+ \cdot \cdot \cdot + x2
nŌłÆ1
xn
\geq(1 + XnŌłÆ1)2
XnŌłÆ1 + xn
\geq
4XnŌłÆ1
XnŌłÆ1 + xn
=
1 + xn/XnŌłÆ1
. (1)
Since xn \leqxnŌłÆ1 \leq\cdot \cdot \cdot \leqx1, it follows that XnŌłÆ1 \geq(n ŌłÆ1)xn. Now
(1) yields x2
0/x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + x2
nŌłÆ1/xn \geq4(n ŌłÆ1)/n, which exceeds 3.999
for n > 4000.
(b) The sequence xn = 1/2n obviously satis’¼ües the required condition.
Second solution to part (a). For each n \inN, let us ’¼ünd a constant cn such
that the inequality x2
0/x1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + x2
nŌłÆ1/xn \geqcnx0 holds for any sequence
x0 \geqx1 \geq\cdot \cdot \cdot \geqxn > 0.
For n = 1 we can take c1 = 1. Assuming that cn exists, we have
x2
x1
+
x2
x2
+ \cdot \cdot \cdot +
x2
n
xn+1

\geqx2
x1
+ cnx1 \geq2

x2
0cn = x0 \cdot 2\sqrtcn.
Thus we can take cn+1 = 2\sqrtcn. Then inductively cn = 22ŌłÆ1/2nŌłÆ2, and
since cn \to4 as n \to\infty, the result follows.
Third solution. Since {xn} is decreasing, there exists limn\to\inftyxn = x \geq0.
If x > 0, then x2
nŌłÆ1/xn \geqxn \geqx holds for each n, and the result is trivial.

If otherwise x = 0, then we note that x2
nŌłÆ1/xn \geq4(xnŌłÆ1 ŌłÆxn) for each
n, with equality if and only if xnŌłÆ1 = 2xn. Hence
lim
n\to\infty
n

k=1
x2
kŌłÆ1
xk
\geqlim
n\to\infty
n

k=1
4(xkŌłÆ1 ŌłÆxk) = 4x0 = 4.
Equality holds if and only if xnŌłÆ1 = 2xn for all n, and consequently
xn = 1/2n.
