---
title: "IMO 1972 SL 10"
description: 'Prove that for each n \geq4 every cyclic quadrilateral can'
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1972
type: "shortlist"
number: 10
origin: "NET"
weight: 197200010
draft: false
---

# IMO 1972 SL 10

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

Prove that for each n \geq4 every cyclic quadrilateral can
be decomposed into n cyclic quadrilaterals.

## Solution

Consider ﬁrst a triangle. It can be decomposed into k = 3 cyclic quadri-
laterals by perpendiculars from some interior point of it to the sides; also,
it can be decomposed into a cyclic quadrilateral and a triangle, and it
follows by induction that this decomposition is possible for every k. Since
every triangle can be cut into two triangles, the required decomposition
is possible for each n \geq6. It remains to treat the cases n = 4 and n = 5.
n = 4. If the center O of the circumcircle is inside a cyclic quadrilateral
ABCD, then the required decomposition is eﬀected by perpendiculars
from O to the four sides. Otherwise, let C and D be the vertices of
the obtuse angles of the quadrilateral. Draw the perpendiculars at C
and D to the lines BC and AD respectively, and choose points P and
Q on them such that PQ \parallelAB. Then the required decomposition is
eﬀected by CP, PQ, QD and the perpendiculars from P and Q to AB.
n = 5. If ABCD is an isosceles trapezoid with AB \parallelCD and AD = BC,
then it is trivially decomposed by lines parallel to AB. Otherwise,
ABCD can be decomposed into a cyclic quadrilateral and a trape-
zoid; this trapezoid can be cut into an isosceles trapezoid and a trian-
gle, which can further be cut into three cyclic quadrilaterals and an
isosceles trapezoid.

Remark.
It can be shown that the assertion is not true for n = 2 and
n = 3.
