---
title: "IMO 1972 SL 11"
description: "Consider a sequence of circles K1, K2, K3, K4, . . . of radii"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1972
type: "shortlist"
number: 11
origin: "NET"
weight: 197200011
draft: false
---

# IMO 1972 SL 11

**Origin:** NET

## Problem

Consider a sequence of circles K1, K2, K3, K4, . . . of radii
r1, r2, r3, r4, . . . , respectively, situated inside a triangle ABC. The circle
K1 is tangent to AB and AC; K2 is tangent to K1, BA, and BC; K3 is
tangent to K2, CA, and CB; K4 is tangent to K3, AB, and AC; etc.
(a) Prove the relation
r1 cot 1
2A + 2\sqrtr1r2 + r2 cot 1
2B = r

cot 1
2A + cot 1
2B

,
where r is the radius of the incircle of the triangle ABC. Deduce the
existence of a t1 such that
r1 = r cot 1
2B cot 1
2C sin2 t1.
(b) Prove that the sequence of circles K1, K2, . . . is periodic.

## Solution

Let \angleA = 2x, \angleB = 2y, \angleC = 2z.
(a) Denote by Mi the center of Ki, i = 1, 2, . . . . If N1, N2 are the projec-
tions of M1, M2 onto AB, we have AN1 = r1 cot x, N2B = r2 cot y,
and N1N2 =

(r1 + r2)2 −(r1 −r2)2 = 2\sqrtr1r2. The required rela-
tion between r1, r2 follows from AB = AN1 + N1N2 + N2B.
If this relation is further considered as a quadratic equation in \sqrtr2,
then its discriminant, which equals
∆= 4 (r(cot x + cot y) cot y −r1(cot x cot y −1)) ,
must be nonnegative, and therefore r1 \leqr cot y cot z. Then t1, t2, . . .
exist, and we can assume that ti \in[0, \pi/2].
(b) Substituting r1 = r cot y cot z sin2 t1, r2 = r cot z cot x sin2 t2 in the
relation of (a) we obtain that sin2 t1 +sin2 t2 +k2 +2k sin t1 sin t2 = 1,
where we set k = \sqrttan x tan y. It follows that (k + sin t1 sin t2)2 =
(1 −sin2 t1)(1 −sin2 t2) = cos2 t1 cos2 t2, and hence
cos(t1 + t2) = cos t1 cos t2 −sin t1 sin t2 = k = \sqrttan x tan y,
which is constant. Writing the analogous relations for each ti, ti+1 we
conclude that t1 + t2 = t4 + t5, t2 + t3 = t5 + t6, and t3 + t4 = t6 + t7.
It follows that t1 = t7, i.e., K1 = K7.
