---
title: "IMO 1972 SL 4"
description: "Let n1, n2 be positive integers. Consider in a plane E two dis-"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1972
type: "shortlist"
number: 4
origin: "GDR"
weight: 197200004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1972 SL 4

**Origin:** GDR

## Problem

Let n1, n2 be positive integers. Consider in a plane E two dis-
joint sets of points M1 and M2 consisting of 2n1 and 2n2 points, respec-
tively, and such that no three points of the union M1 \cupM2 are collinear.
Prove that there exists a straightline g with the following property: Each
of the two half-planes determined by g on E (g not being included in
either) contains exactly half of the points of M1 and exactly half of the
points of M2.

## Solution

Choose in E a half-line s beginning at a point O. For every \alpha in the interval
[0, 180◦], denote by s(\alpha) the line obtained by rotation of s about O by \alpha,
and by g(\alpha) the oriented line containing s(\alpha) on which s(\alpha) deﬁnes the
positive direction. For each P in Mi, i = 1, 2, let P(\alpha) be the foot of the
perpendicular from P to g(\alpha), and lP (\alpha) the oriented (positive, negative
or zero) distance of P(\alpha) from O. Then for i = 1, 2 one can arrange the
lP (\alpha) (P \inMi) in ascending order, as l1(\alpha), l2(\alpha), . . . , l2ni(\alpha). Call Ji(\alpha)
the interval [lni(\alpha), lni+1(\alpha)]. It is easy to see that any line perpendicular
to g(\alpha) and passing through the point with the distance l in the interior of
Ji(\alpha) from O, will divide the set Mi into two subsets of equal cardinality.
Therefore it remains to show that for some \alpha, the interiors of intervals
J1(\alpha) and J2(\alpha) have a common point. If this holds for \alpha = 0, then

we have ﬁnished. Suppose w.l.o.g. that J1(0) lies on g(0) to the left of
J2(0); then J1(180◦) lies to the right of J2(180◦). Note that J1 and J2
cannot simultaneously degenerate to a point (otherwise, we would have
four collinear points in M1 \cupM2); also, each of them degenerates to a
point for only ﬁnitely many values of \alpha. Since J1(\alpha) and J2(\alpha) move
continuously, there exists a subinterval I of [0, 180◦] on which they are
not disjoint. Thus, at some point of I, they are both nondegenerate and
have a common interior point, as desired.
