---
title: "IMO 1972 SL 5"
description: "Prove the following assertion: The four altitudes of a tetrahe-"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1972
type: "shortlist"
number: 5
origin: "GDR"
weight: 197200005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1972 SL 5

**Origin:** GDR

## Problem

Prove the following assertion: The four altitudes of a tetrahe-
dron ABCD intersect in a point if and only if
AB2 + CD2 = BC2 + AD2 = CA2 + BD2.

## Solution

Lemma. If X, Y, Z, T are points in space, then the lines XZ and Y T are
perpendicular if and only if XY 2 + ZT 2 = Y Z2 + TX2.
Proof. Consider the plane \pi through XZ parallel to Y T. If Y ′, T ′ are the
feet of the perpendiculars to \pi from Y, T respectively, then
XY 2 + ZT 2 = XY ′2 + ZT ′2 + 2Y Y ′2,
and
Y Z2 + TX2 = Y ′Z2 + T ′X2 + 2Y Y ′2.
Since by the Pythagorean theorem XY ′2 +ZT ′2 = Y ′Z2 +T ′X2, i.e.,
XY ′2−Y ′Z2 = XT ′2−T ′Z2, if and only if Y ′T ′ \perpXZ, the statement
follows.
Assume that the four altitudes intersect in a point P. Then we have DP \perp
ABC ⇒DP \perpAB and CP \perpABD ⇒CP \perpAB, which implies that
CDP \perpAB, and CD \perpAB. By the lemma, AC2 + BD2 = AD2 + BC2.
Using the same procedure we obtain the relation AD2 + BC2 = AB2 +
CD2.
Conversely, assume that AB2 + CD2 = AC2 + BD2 = AD2 + BC2. The
lemma implies that AB \perpCD, AC \perpBD, AD \perpBC. Let \pi be the plane
containing CD that is perpendicular to AB, and let hD be the altitude
from D to ABC. Since \pi \perpAB, we have \pi \perpABC ⇒hD \subset\pi and
\pi \perpABD ⇒hC \subset\pi. The altitudes hD and hC are not parallel; thus
they have an intersection point PCD. Analogously, hB \caphC = {PBC} and
hB \caphD = {PBD}, where both these points belong to \pi. On the other
hand, hB doesn’t belong to \pi; otherwise, it would be perpendicular to
both ACD and AB \subset\pi, i.e. AB \subsetACD, which is impossible. Hence,
hB can have at most one common point with \pi, implying PBD = PCD.
Analogously, PAB = PBD = PCD = PABCD.
