---
title: "IMO 1972 SL 7"
description: "(a) A plane \pi passes through the vertex O of the regular"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1972
type: "shortlist"
number: 7
origin: "GBR"
weight: 197200007
draft: false
---

# IMO 1972 SL 7

**Origin:** GBR

## Problem

(a) A plane \pi passes through the vertex O of the regular
tetrahedron OPQR. We deﬁne p, q, r to be the signed distances of
P, Q, R from \pi measured along a directed normal to \pi. Prove that
p2 + q2 + r2 + (q −r)2 + (r −p)2 + (p −q)2 = 2a2,
where a is the length of an edge of a tetrahedron.
(b) Given four parallel planes not all of which are coincident, show that
a regular tetrahedron exists with a vertex on each plane.

## Solution

(i) Consider the circumscribing cube
OQ1PR1O1QP1R (that is, the
cube in which the edges of the
tetrahedron are small diagonals),
of side b = a
\sqrt
2/2. The left-hand
side is the sum of squares of the
projections of the edges of the
tetrahedron onto a perpendicular
l to \pi. On the other hand, if l
O
Q1
P
R1
O1
Q
P1
R
forms angles ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3 with OO1, OQ1, OR1 respectively, then the
projections of OP and QR onto l have lengths b(cosϕ2 + cos ϕ3) and
b| cos ϕ2 −cos ϕ3|. Summing up all these expressions, we obtain
4b2(cos2 ϕ1 + cos2 ϕ2 + cos2 ϕ3) = 4b2 = 2a2.
(ii) We construct a required tetrahedron of edge length a given in (i).
Take O arbitrarily on \pi0, and let p, q, r be the distances of O from
\pi1, \pi2, \pi3. Since a > p, q, r, |p−q|, we can choose P on \pi1 anywhere at
distance a from O, and Q at one of the two points on \pi2 at distance
a from both O and P. Consider the fourth vertex of the tetrahedron:
its distance from \pi0 will satisfy the equation from (i); i.e., there are
two values for this distance; clearly, one of them is r, putting R on \pi3.
