---
title: "IMO 1996 SL C1"
description: "We are given a positive integer r and a rectangular board"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1996
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 1
origin: "FIN"
weight: 199602001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1996 SL C1

**Origin:** FIN  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

We are given a positive integer r and a rectangular board
ABCD with dimensions |AB| = 20, |BC| = 12. The rectangle is divided
into a grid of 20 \times 12 unit squares. The following moves are permitted on
the board: One can move from one square to another only if the distance
between the centers of the two squares is \sqrtr. The task is to ﬁnd a sequence
of moves leading from the square corresponding to vertex A to the square
corresponding to vertex B.
(a) Show that the task cannot be done if r is divisible by 2 or 3.
(b) Prove that the task is possible when r = 73.
(c) Is there a solution when r = 97?

## Solution

We shall work on the array of lattice points deﬁned by A = {(x, y) \inZ2 |
0 \leqx \leq19, 0 \leqy \leq11}. Our task is to move from (0, 0) to (19, 0) via
the points of A so that each move has the form (x, y) \to(x + a, y + b),
where a, b \inZ and a2 + b2 = r.

(a) If r is even, then a + b is even whenever a2 + b2 = r (a, b \inZ). Thus
the parity of x + y does not change after each move, so we cannot
reach (19, 0) from (0, 0).
If 3 | r, then both a and b are divisible by 3, so if a point (x, y) can
be reached from (0, 0), we must have 3 | x. Since 3 ∤19, we cannot get
to (19, 0).
(b) We have r = 73 = 82+32, so each move is either (x, y) \to(x\pm8, y\pm3)
or (x, y) \to(x \pm 3, y \pm 8). One possible solution is shown in Fig. 1.
(c) We have 97 = 92 + 42. Let us partition A as B \cupC, where B =
{(x, y) \inA | 4 \leqy \leq7}. It is easily seen that moves of the type
(x, y) \to(x \pm 9, y \pm 4) always take us from the set B to C and vice
versa, while the moves (x, y) \to(x\pm4, y \pm9) always take us from C to
C. Furthermore, each move of the type (x, y) \to(x \pm 9, y \pm 4) changes
the parity of x, so to get from (0, 0) to (19, 0) we must have an odd
number of such moves. On the other hand, with an odd number of
such moves, starting from C we can end up only in B, although the
point (19, 0) is not in B. Hence, the answer is no.
Remark.
Part (c) can also be solved by examining all cells that can be
reached from (0, 0). All these cells are marked in Fig. 2.
•\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot◦\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot\cdot•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
