---
title: "IMO 1996 SL C3"
description: "Let k, m, n be integers such that 1 < n \leqm −1 \leqk."
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1996
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 3
origin: "USA"
weight: 199602003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1996 SL C3

**Origin:** USA  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let k, m, n be integers such that 1 < n \leqm −1 \leqk.
Determine the maximum size of a subset S of the set {1, 2, 3, . . ., k} such
that no n distinct elements of S add up to m.

## Solution

Denote the required maximum size by Mk(m, n). If m <
n(n+1)
, then
trivially M = k, so from now on we assume that m \geqn(n+1)
.
First we give a lower bound for M. Let r = rk(m, n) be the largest integer
such that r + (r + 1) + \cdot \cdot \cdot + (r + n −1) \leqm. This is equivalent to
nr \leqm −n(n−1)
\leqn(r + 1), so r =
/ m
n −n−1
. Clearly no n elements
from {r + 1, r + 2, . . . , k} add up to m, so

M \geqk −rk(m, n) = k −
m
n −n −1

.
(1)
We claim that M is actually equal to k −rk(m, n). To show this, we shall
prove by induction on n that if no n elements of a set S \subseteq{1, 2, . . ., k}
add up to m, then |S| \leqk −rk(m, n).
For n = 2 the claim is true, because then for each i = 1, . . . , rk(m, 2) =
/ m−1
at least one of i and m −i must be excluded from S. Now let
us assume that n > 2 and that the result holds for n −1. Suppose that
S \subseteq{1, 2, . . ., k} does not contain n distinct elements with the sum m,
and let x be the smallest element of S. We may assume that x \leqrk(m, n),
because otherwise the statement is clear. Consider the set S′ = {y −x |
y \inS, y ̸= x}. Then S′ is a subset of {1, 2, . . ., k −x} no n −1 elements
of which have the sum m −nx. Also, it is easily checked that n −1 \leq
m −nx −1 \leqk −x, so we may apply the induction hypothesis, which
yields that
|S| \leq1 + k −x −rk(m −nx, n −1) = k −
m −x
n −1 −n

.
(2)
On the other hand,

m−x
n−1 −n

−rk(m, n) = m−nx−n(n−1)
n(n−1)
\geq0 because
x \leqrk(m, n); hence (2) implies |S| \leqk −rk(m, n) as claimed.
