---
title: "IMO 1996 SL C4"
description: "Determine whether or not there exist two disjoint inﬁnite sets"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1996
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 4
origin: "FIN"
weight: 199602004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1996 SL C4

**Origin:** FIN  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Determine whether or not there exist two disjoint inﬁnite sets
A and B of points in the plane satisfying the following conditions:
(i) No three points in A \cupB are collinear, and the distance between any
two points in A \cupB is at least 1.
(ii) There is a point of A in any triangle whose vertices are in B, and there
is a point of B in any triangle whose vertices are in A.

## Solution

Suppose that such sets of points A, B exist.
First, we observe that there exist ﬁve points A, B, C, D, E in A such that
their convex hull does not contain any other point of A. Indeed, take any
point A \inA. Since any two points of A are at distance at least 1, the
number of points X \inA with XA \leqr is ﬁnite for every r > 0. Thus it is
enough to choose four points B, C, D, E of A that are closest to A. Now
consider the convex hull C of A, B, C, D, E.
Suppose that C is a pentagon, say ABCDE. Then each of the disjoint
triangles ABC, ACD, ADE contains a point of B. Denote these points by
P, Q, R. Then \trianglePQR contains some point F \inA, so F is inside ABCDE,
a contradiction.
Suppose that C is a quadrilateral, say ABCD, with E lying within
ABCD. Then the triangles ABE, BCE, CDE, DAE contain some points
P, Q, R, S of B that form two disjoint triangles. It follows that there are
two points of A inside ABCD, which is a contradiction.
Finally, suppose that C is a triangle with two points of A inside. Then C is
the union of ﬁve disjoint triangles with vertices in A, so there are at least
ﬁve points of B inside C. These ﬁve points make at least three disjoint
triangles containing three points of A. This is again a contradiction.
It follows that no such sets A, B exist.
