---
title: "IMO 1996 SL G3"
description: "Let ABC be an acute-angled triangle with BC > CA. Let"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1996
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 3
origin: "GBR"
weight: 199603003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1996 SL G3

**Origin:** GBR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let ABC be an acute-angled triangle with BC > CA. Let
O be the circumcenter, H its orthocenter, and F the foot of its altitude
CH. Let the perpendicular to OF at F meet the side CA at P. Prove
that \angleFHP = \angleBAC.
Possible second part: What happens if |BC| \leq|CA| (the triangle still
being acute-angled)?

## Solution

It is easy to see that P lies on the segment AC. Let E be the foot of
the altitude BH and Y, Z the midpoints of AC, AB respectively. Draw
the perpendicular HR to FP (R \inFP). Since Y is the circumcenter
of \triangleFCA, we have \angleFY A = 180◦−2\angleA. Also, OFPY is cyclic; hence
\angleOPF = \angleOY F = 2\angleA −90◦. Next, \triangleOZF and \triangleHRF are similar, so
OZ/OF = HR/HF. This leads to
HR \cdot OF = HF \cdot OZ =
2HF \cdot
HC = 1
2HE \cdot HB = HE \cdot OY
=⇒
HR/HE
=
OY/OF. Moreover,
\angleEHR = \angleFOY ; hence the tri-
angles EHR and FOY are similar.
Consequently \angleHPC = \angleHRE =
\angleOY F = 2\angleA −90◦, and ﬁnally,
\angleFHP = \angleHPC + \angleHCP = \angleA.
A
B
C
Y
Z
O
F
H
E
P
R
Second solution. As before, \angleHFY = 90◦−\angleA, so it suﬃces to show that
HP \perpFY . The points O, F, P, Y lie on a circle, say Ω1 with center at
the midpoint Q of OP. Furthermore, the points F, Y lie on the nine-point
circle Ωof \triangleABC with center at the midpoint N of OH. The segment FY
is the common chord of Ω1 and Ω, from which we deduce that NQ \perpFY .
However, NQ \parallelHP, and the result follows.
Third solution.
Let H′ be the point symmetric to H with respect to
AB. Then H′ lies on the circumcircle of ABC. Let the line FP meet
the circumcircle at U, V and meet H′B at P ′. Since OF \perpUV , F is the
midpoint of UV . By the butterﬂy theorem, F is also the midpoint of PP ′.
Therefore \triangleH′FP ′ ∼= FHP; hence \angleFHP = \angleFH′B = \angleA.
Remark. It is possible to solve the problem using trigonometry. For ex-
ample, F Z
ZO = F K
KP = sin(A−B)
cos C
, where K is on CF with PK \perpCF. Then
CF
KP =
sin(A−B)
cos C
+ tan A, from which one obtains formulas for KP and
KH. Finally, we can calculate tan \angleFHP = KP
KH = \cdot \cdot \cdot = tan A.
Second remark.
Here is what happens when BC \leqCA. If \angleA > 45◦,
then \angleFHP = \angleA. If \angleA = 45◦, the point P escapes to inﬁnity. If
\angleA < 45◦, the point P appears on the extension of AC over C, and
\angleFHP = 180◦−\angleA.
