---
title: "IMO 1996 SL G5"
description: "Let ABCDEF be a convex hexagon such that AB"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1996
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 5
origin: "ARM"
weight: 199603005
draft: false
---

# IMO 1996 SL G5

**Origin:** ARM  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let ABCDEF be a convex hexagon such that AB
is parallel to DE, BC is parallel to EF, and CD is parallel to AF.
Let RA, RC, RE be the circumradii of triangles FAB, BCD, DEF respec-
tively, and let P denote the perimeter of the hexagon. Prove that
RA + RC + RE \geqP
2 .

## Solution

Let a, b, c, d, e, and f denote the lengths of the sides AB, BC, CD, DE,
EF, and FA respectively.
Note that \angleA = \angleD, \angleB = \angleE,
and \angleC = \angleF. Draw the lines PQ
and RS through A and D perpen-
dicular to BC and EF respectively
(P, R \inBC, Q, S \inEF). Then
BF \geqPQ = RS. Therefore 2BF \geq
PQ + RS, or
A
B
C
D
Q
E
F
P
R
S
a
b
c
d
e
f
2BF \geq(a sin B + f sin C) + (c sin C + d sin B),
and similarly, 2BD \geq(c sin A + b sin B) + (e sin B + f sin A),
2DF \geq(e sin C + d sin A) + (a sin A + b sin C).
(1)
Next, we have the following formulas for the considered circumradii:
RA =
BF
2 sin A,
RC =
BD
2 sin C ,
RE =
DF
2 sin E .
It follows from (1) that
RA + RC + RE \geq1
4a
sin B
sin A + sin A
sin B

+ 1
4b
sin C
sin B + sin B
sin C

+ \cdot \cdot \cdot
\geq1
2(a + b + \cdot \cdot \cdot ) = P
2 ,
with equality if and only if \angleA = \angleB = \angleC = 120◦and FB \perpBC etc.,
i.e., if and only if the hexagon is regular.
Second solution. Let us construct points A′′, C′′, E′′ such that ABA′′F,
CDC′′B, and EFE′′D are parallelograms. It follows that A′′, C′′, B are
collinear and also C′′, E′′, B and
E′′, A′′, F. Furthermore, let A′ be
the intersection of the perpendicu-
lars through F and B to FA′′ and
BA′′, respectively, and let C′ and
E′ be analogously deﬁned. Since
A′FA′′B is cyclic with the diameter
being A′A′′ and since \triangleFA′′B ∼=
\triangleBAF, it follows that 2RA
=
A′A′′ = x.
A
B
C
D
E
F
A′
C′
E′
A′′
C′′
E′′
Similarly, 2RC = C′C′′ = y and 2RE = E′E′′ = z. We also have AB =
FA′′ = ya, AF = A′′B = za, CD = C′′B = zc, CB = C′′D = xc,
EF = E′′D = xe, and ED = E′′F = ye. The original inequality we must
prove now becomes
x + y + z \geqya + za + zc + xc + xe + ye .
(1)

We now follow and generalize the standard proof of the Erd˝os–Mordell
inequality (for the triangle A′C′E′), which is what (1) is equivalent to
when A′′ = C′′ = E′′.
We set C′E′ = a, A′E′ = c and A′C′ = e. Let A1 be the point symmetric
to A′′ with respect to the bisector of \angleE′A′C′. Let F1 and B1 be the
feet of the perpendiculars from A1 to A′C′ and A′E′, respectively. In that
case, A1F1 = A′′F = ya and A1B1 = A′′B = za. We have
ax = A′A1 \cdot E′C′ \geq2SA′E′A1C′ = 2SA′E′A1 + 2SA′C′A1
= cza + eya .
Similarly, cy \geqexc + azc and ez \geqaye + cxe. Thus
x + y + z \geqc
aza + a
c zc + e
cxc + c
exe + a
eye + e
aya
=
 c
a + a
c
za + zc

+
 c
a −a
c
za −zc

+ \cdot \cdot \cdot .
(2)
Let us set a1 = xc−xe
, c1 = ye−ya
, e1 = za−zc
. We note that \triangleA′′C′′E′′ ∼
\triangleA′C′E′ and hence a1/a = c1/c = e1/e = k. Thus
 c
a −a
c

e1 +
 e
c −c
e

a1 +
 a
e −e
a

c1 = k
 ce
a −ae
c + ea
c −ca
e + ac
e −ec
a

= 0. Equation
(2) reduces to
x + y + z \geq
 c
a + a
c
za + zc

+
e
c + c
e
xe + xc

+
a
e + e
a
ya + ye

.
Using c/a + a/c, e/c + c/e, a/e + e/a \geq2 we ﬁnally get x + y + z \geq
ya + za + zc + xc + xe + ye.
Equality holds if and only if a = c = e and A′′ = C′′ = E′′ =
center of \triangleA′C′E′, i.e., if and only if ABCDEF is regular.
Remark. From the second proof it is evident that the Erd˝os–Mordell in-
equality is a special case of the problem. if Pa, Pb, Pc are the feet of the
perpendiculars from a point P inside \triangleABC to the sides BC, CA, AB,
and PaPPbP ′
c, PbPPcP ′
a, PcPPaP ′
b parallelograms, we can apply the prob-
lem to the hexagon PaP ′
cPbP ′
aPcP ′
b to prove the Erd˝os–Mordell inequality
for \triangleABC and point P.
