---
title: "IMO 2004 SL C1"
description: "There are 10001 students at a university. Some students join"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 1
origin: "PUR"
weight: 200402001
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL C1

**Origin:** PUR  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

There are 10001 students at a university. Some students join
together to form several clubs (a student may belong to diﬀerent clubs).
Some clubs join together to form several societies (a club may belong
to diﬀerent societies). There are a total of k societies. Suppose that the
following conditions hold:
(i) Each pair of students are in exactly one club.
(ii) For each student and each society, the student is in exactly one club
of the society.
(iii) Each club has an odd number of students. In addition, a club with
2m + 1 students (m is a positive integer) is in exactly m societies.
Find all possible values of k.

## Solution

Let us write n = 10001. Denote by T the set of ordered triples (a, C, S),
where a is a student, C a club, and S a society such that a \inC and
C \inS. We shall count |T | in two diﬀerent ways.
Fix a student a and a society S. By (ii), there is a unique club C such
that (a, C, S) \inT . Since the ordered pair (a, S) can be chosen in nk ways,
we have that |T | = nk.
Now ﬁx a club C. By (iii), C is in exactly (|C| −1)/2 societies, so there
are |C|(|C| −1)/2 triples from T with second coordinate C. If C is the set
of all clubs, we obtain |T | = 
C\inC
|C|(|C|−1)
. But we also conclude from
(i) that

C\inC
|C|(|C| −1)
= n(n −1)
.
Therefore n(n −1)/2 = nk, i.e., k = (n −1)/2 = 5000.
On the other hand, for k = (n −1)/2 there is a desired conﬁguration with
only one club C that contains all students and k identical societies with
only one element (the club C). It is easy to verify that (i)–(iii) hold.
