---
title: "IMO 2004 SL C4"
description: "Consider a matrix of size n\timesn whose entries are real numbers"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 4
origin: "POL"
weight: 200402004
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL C4

**Origin:** POL  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Consider a matrix of size n\timesn whose entries are real numbers
of absolute value not exceeding 1, and the sum of all entries is 0. Let n be
an even positive integer. Determine the least number C such that every
such matrix necessarily has a row or a column with the sum of its entries
not exceeding C in absolute value.

## Solution

Consider the matrix A = (aij)n
i,j=1 such that aij is equal to 1 if i, j \leqn/2,
−1 if i, j > n/2, and 0 otherwise. This matrix satisﬁes the conditions from
the problem and all row sums and column sums are equal to \pmn/2. Hence
C \geqn/2.
Let us show that C = n/2. Assume to the contrary that there is a matrix
B = (bij)n
i,j=1 all of whose row sums and column sums are either greater
than n/2 or smaller than −n/2. We may assume w.l.o.g. that at least n/2
row sums are positive and, permuting rows if necessary, that the ﬁrst n/2
rows have positive sums. The sum of entries in the n/2 \times n submatrix B′
consisting of ﬁrst n/2 rows is greater than n2/4, and since each column
of B′ has sum at most n/2, it follows that more than n/2 column sums of
B′, and therefore also of B, are positive. Again, suppose w.l.o.g. that the
ﬁrst n/2 column sums are positive. Thus the sums R+ and C+ of entries
in the ﬁrst n/2 rows and in the ﬁrst n/2 columns respectively are greater
than n2/4. Now the sum of all entries of B can be written as

aij = R+ + C+ +

i>n/2
j>n/2
aij −

i\leqn/2
j\leqn/2
aij > n2
2 −n2
4 −n2
4 = 0,
a contradiction. Hence C = n/2, as claimed.
