---
title: "IMO 2004 SL C5"
description: "Let N be a positive integer. Two players A and B, taking"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 5
origin: "NZL"
weight: 200402005
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL C5

**Origin:** NZL  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let N be a positive integer. Two players A and B, taking
turns, write numbers from the set {1, . . . , N} on a blackboard. A begins
the game by writing 1 on his ﬁrst move. Then, if a player has written n on
a certain move, his adversary is allowed to write n+1 or 2n (provided the
number he writes does not exceed N). The player who writes N wins. We
say that N is of type A or of type B according as A or B has a winning
strategy.
(a) Determine whether N = 2004 is of type A or of type B.
(b) Find the least N > 2004 whose type is diﬀerent from that of 2004.

## Solution

We say that a number n \in{1, 2, . . ., N} is winning if the player who is on
turn has a winning strategy, and losing otherwise. The game is of type A
if and only if 1 is a losing number.
Let us deﬁne n0 = N, ni+1 = [ni/2] for i = 0, 1, . . . and let k be such
that nk = 1. Consider the sets Ai = {ni+1 + 1, . . . , ni}. We call a set
Ai all-winning if all numbers from Ai are winning, even-winning if even
numbers are winning and odd are losing, and odd-winning if odd numbers
are winning and even are losing.
(i) Suppose Ai is even-winning and consider Ai+1. Multiplying any num-
ber from Ai+1 by 2 yields an even number from Ai, which is a losing
number. Thus x \inAi+1 is winning if and only if x + 1 is losing, i.e.,
if and only if it is even. Hence Ai+1 is also even-winning.
(ii) Suppose Ai is odd-winning. Then each k \inAi+1 is winning, since 2k
is losing. Hence Ai+1 is all-winning.
(iii) Suppose Ai is all-winning. Multiplying x \inAi+1 by two is then a
losing move, so x is winning if and only if x+1 is losing. Since ni+1 is
losing, Ai+1 is odd-winning if ni+1 is even and even-winning otherwise.
We observe that A0 is even-winning if N is odd and odd-winning other-
wise. Also, if some Ai is even-winning, then all Ai+1, Ai+2, . . . are even-
winning and thus 1 is losing; i.e., the game is of type A. The game is of type
B if and only if the sets A0, A1, . . . are alternately odd-winning and all-
winning with A0 odd-winning, which is equivalent to N = n0, n2, n4, . . .
all being even. Thus N is of type B if and only if all digits at the odd
positions in the binary representation of N are zeros.
Since 2004 = 11111010100 in the binary system, 2004 is of type A. The
least N > 2004 that is of type B is 100000000000 = 211 = 2048. Thus the
answer to part (b) is 2048.
