---
title: "IMO 2004 SL C7"
description: "Determine all m \times n rectangles that can be covered with"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 7
origin: "EST"
weight: 200402007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL C7

**Origin:** EST  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Determine all m \times n rectangles that can be covered with
hooks made up of 6 unit squares, as in the ﬁgure:
Rotations and reﬂections of hooks are allowed. The rectangle must be
covered without gaps and overlaps. No part of a hook may cover area
outside the rectangle.

## Solution

Suppose that an m\timesn rectangle can be covered by “hooks”. For any hook
H there is a unique hook K that covers its “ inside” square. Then also H
covers the inside square of K, so the set of hooks can be partitioned into
pairs of type {H, K}, each of which forms one of the following two ﬁgures
consisting of 12 squares:
A1
B1
A2
B2
Thus the m \times n rectangle is covered by these tiles. It immediately follows
that 12 | mn.
Suppose one of m, n is divisible by 4. Let w.l.o.g. 4 | m. If 3 | n, one can
easily cover the rectangle by 3\times4 rectangles and therefore by hooks. Also,
if 12 | m and n ̸\in{1, 2, 5}, then there exist k, l \inN0 such that n = 3k+4l,
and thus the rectangle m \times n can be partitioned into 3 \times 12 and 4 \times 12
rectangles all of which can be covered by hooks. If 12 | m and n = 1, 2, or
5, then it is easy to see that covering by hooks is not possible.
Now suppose that 4 ∤m and 4 ∤n. Then m, n are even and the number
of tiles is odd. Assume that the total number of tiles of types A1 and B1
is odd (otherwise the total number of tiles of types A2 and B2 is odd,
which is analogous). If we color in black all columns whose indices are
divisible by 4, we see that each tile of type A1 or B1 covers three black
squares, which yields an odd number in total. Hence the total number of
black squares covered by the tiles of types A2 and B2 must be odd. This
is impossible, since each such tile covers two or four black squares.
