---
title: "IMO 2004 SL G6"
description: "Let P be a convex polygon. Prove that there is a convex"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 6
origin: "GBR"
weight: 200403006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL G6

**Origin:** GBR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let P be a convex polygon. Prove that there is a convex
hexagon that is contained in P and that occupies at least 75 percent of
the area of P.

## Solution

Let ABC be the triangle of maximum area S contained in P (it exists
because of compactness of P). Draw parallels to BC, CA, AB through
A, B, C, respectively, and denote the triangle thus obtained by A1B1C1
(A \inB1C1, etc.). Since each triangle with vertices in P has area at most
S, the entire polygon P is contained in A1B1C1.
Next, draw lines of support of P parallel to BC, CA, AB and not intersect-
ing the triangle ABC. They determine a convex hexagon UaVaUbVbUcVc
containing P, with Vb, Uc \inB1C1, Vc, Ua \inC1A1, Va, Ub \inA1B1. Each
of the line segments UaVa, UbVb, UcVc contains points of P. Choose such
points A0, B0, C0 on UaVa, UbVb, UcVc, respectively. The convex hexagon
AC0BA0CB0 is contained in P, because the latter is convex. We prove
that AC0BA0CB0 has area at least 3/4 the area of P.
Let x, y, z denote the areas of triangles UaBC, UbCA, and UcAB. Then
S1 = SAC0BA0CB0 = S + x + y + z. On the other hand, the triangle
A1UaVa is similar to \triangleA1BC with similitude \tau = (S −x)/S, and hence
its area is \tau 2S = (S −x)2/S. Thus the area of quadrilateral UaVaCB is
S −(S −x)2/S = 2z −z2/S. Analogous formulas hold for quadrilaterals
UbVbAC and UcVcBA. Therefore
SP \leqSUaVaUbVbUcVc = S + SUaVaCB + SUbVbAC + SUcVcBA
= S + 2(x + y + z) −x2 + y2 + z2
S
\leqS + 2(x + y + z) −(x + y + z)2
3S
.
Now 4S1−3SP \geq= S−2(x+y+z)+(x+y+z)2/S = (S−x−y−z)2/S \geq0;
i.e., S1 \geq3SP/4, as claimed.
