---
title: "IMO 2004 SL G7"
description: "For a given triangle ABC, let X be a variable point on"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 7
origin: "RUS"
weight: 200403007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL G7

**Origin:** RUS  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

For a given triangle ABC, let X be a variable point on
the line BC such that C lies between B and X and the incircles of the
triangles ABX and ACX intersect at two distinct points P and Q. Prove
that the line PQ passes through a point independent of X.

## Solution

The proof uses the following observation:

Lemma. In a triangle ABC, let K, L be the midpoints of the sides AC, AB,
respectively, and let the incircle of the triangle touch BC, CA at D, E,
respectively. Then the lines KL and DE intersect on the bisector of
the angle ABC.
Proof. Let the bisector ℓb of \angleABC meet DE at T . One can assume that
AB ̸= BC, or else T \equivK \inKL. Note that the incenter I of \triangleABC is
between B and T , and also T ̸= E. From the triangles BDT and DEC
we obtain \angleITD = \alpha/2 = \angleIAE, which implies that A, I, T, E are
concyclic. Then \angleATB = \angleAEI = 90◦. Thus L is the circumcenter
of \triangleATB from which \angleLTB = \angleLBT = \angleTBC ⇒LT \parallelBC ⇒T \in
KL, which is what we were supposed to prove.
Let the incircles of \triangleABX and \triangleACX touch BX at D and F, respec-
tively, and let them touch AX at E and G, respectively. Clearly, DE
and FG are parallel. If the line PQ intersects BX and AX at M and
N, respectively, then MD2 = MP \cdot MQ = MF 2, i.e., MD = MF and
analogously NE = NG. It follows that PQ is parallel to DE and FG and
equidistant from them.
The midpoints of AB, AC, and AX lie on the same line m, parallel to BC.
Applying the lemma to \triangleABX, we conclude that DE passes through the
common point U of m and the bisector of \angleABX. Analogously, FG passes
through the common point V of m and the bisector of \angleACX. Therefore
PQ passes through the midpoint W of the line segment UV . Since U, V
do not depend on X, neither does W.
