---
title: "IMO 2004 SL G8"
description: "A cyclic quadrilateral ABCD is given. The lines AD and"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 8
origin: "SMN"
weight: 200403008
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL G8

**Origin:** SMN  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

A cyclic quadrilateral ABCD is given. The lines AD and
BC intersect at E, with C between B and E; the diagonals AC and BD
intersect at F. Let M be the midpoint of the side CD, and let N ̸= M
be a point on the circumcircle of the triangle ABM such that AN/BN =
AM/BM. Prove that the points E, F, and N are collinear.

## Solution

To start with, note that point N is uniquely determined by the imposed
properties. Indeed, f(X) = AX/BX is a monotone function on both arcs
AB of the circumcircle of \triangleABM.
Denote by P and Q respectively
the second points of intersection of
the line EF with the circumcircles
of \triangleABE and \triangleABF. The prob-
lem is equivalent to showing that
N \inPQ. In fact, we shall prove
that N coincides with the midpoint
N of segment PQ.
The cyclic quadrilaterals APBE,
AQBF, and ABCD yield \angleAPQ =
180◦−\angleAPE = 180◦−\angleABE =
\angleADC and \angleAQP = \angleAQF =
\angleABF = \angleACD. It follows that
\triangleAPQ
∼
\triangleADC, and conse-
quently \triangleANP ∼\triangleAMD. Analo-
A
B
C
D
E
F
M
P
Q
N
Ω
gously \triangleBNP ∼\triangleBMC. Therefore AN/AM = PQ/DC = BN/BM,
i.e., AN/BN = AM/BM. Moreover, \angleANB = \angleANP + \anglePNB =
\angleAMD + \angleBMC = 180◦−\angleAMB, which means that point N lies on

the circumcircle of \triangleAMB. By the uniqueness of N, we conclude that
N \equivN, which completes the solution.
