---
title: "IMO 2004 SL N1"
description: "Let \tau(n) denote the number of positive divisors of the positive"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 1
origin: "BLR"
weight: 200404001
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL N1

**Origin:** BLR  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Let \tau(n) denote the number of positive divisors of the positive
integer n. Prove that there exist inﬁnitely many positive integers a such
that the equation
\tau(an) = n
does not have a positive integer solution n.

## Solution

Setting m = an we reduce the given equation to m/\tau(m) = a.
Let us show that for a = pp−1 the above equation has no solutions in
N if p > 3 is a prime. Assume to the contrary that m \inN is such that
m = pp−1\tau(m). Then pp−1 | m, so we may set m = p\alphak, where \alpha, k \inN,
\alpha \geqp −1, and p ∤k. Let k = p\alpha1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot p\alphar
r
be the decomposition of k into
primes. Then \tau(k) = (\alpha1 + 1) \cdot \cdot \cdot (\alphar + 1) and \tau(m) = (\alpha + 1)\tau(k). Our
equation becomes
p\alpha−p+1k = (\alpha + 1)\tau(k).
(1)
We observe that \alpha ̸= p−1: otherwise the RHS would be divisible by p and
the LHS would not be so. It follows that \alpha \geqp, which also easily implies
that p\alpha−p+1 \geq
p
p+1(\alpha + 1).
Furthermore, since \alpha + 1 cannot be divisible by p\alpha−p+1 for any \alpha \geqp, it
follows that p | \tau(k). Thus if p | \tau(k), then at least one \alphai+1 is divisible by
p and consequently \alphai \geqp−1 for some i. Hence k \geq
p
\alphai
i
\alphai+1\tau(k) \geq2p−1
p \tau(k).
But then we have
p\alpha−p+1k \geq
p
p + 1(\alpha + 1) \cdot 2p−1
p
\tau(k) > (\alpha + 1)\tau(k),
contradicting (1). Therefore (1) has no solutions in N.
Remark. There are many other values of a for which the considered equa-
tion has no solutions in N: for example, a = 6p for a prime p \geq5.
