---
title: "IMO 2004 SL N2"
description: "The function \psi from the set N of positive integers into itself"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 2
origin: "RUS"
weight: 200404002
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL N2

**Origin:** RUS  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

The function \psi from the set N of positive integers into itself
is deﬁned by the equality
\psi(n) =
n

k=1
(k, n),
n \inN,
where (k, n) denotes the greatest common divisor of k and n.
(a) Prove that \psi(mn) = \psi(m)\psi(n) for every two relatively prime m, n \in
N.
(b) Prove that for each a \inN the equation \psi(x) = ax has a solution.
(c) Find all a \inN such that the equation \psi(x) = ax has a unique solution.

## Solution

Let n be a natural number. For each k = 1, 2, . . ., n, the number (k, n) is
a divisor of n. Consider any divisor d of n. If (k, n) = n/d, then k = nl/d
for some l \inN, and (k, n) = (l, d)n/d, which implies that l is coprime to
d and l \leqd. It follows that (k, n) is equal to n/d for exactly ϕ(d) natural
numbers k \leqn. Therefore
\psi(n) =
n

k=1
(k, n) =

d|n
ϕ(d)n
d = n

d|n
ϕ(d)
d
.
(1)
(a) Let n, m be coprime. Then each divisor f of mn can be uniquely
expressed as f = de, where d | n and e | m. We now have by (1)
\psi(mn) = mn

f|mn
ϕ(f)
f
= mn

d|n, e|m
ϕ(de)
de
= mn

d|n, e|m
ϕ(d)
d
ϕ(e)
e
=
⎛
⎝n

d|n
ϕ(d)
d
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝m

e|m
ϕ(e)
e
⎞
⎠
= \psi(m)\psi(n).

(b) Let n = pk, where p is a prime and k a positive integer. According to
(1),
\psi(n)
n
=
k

i=0
ϕ(pi)
pi
= 1 + k(p −1)
p
.
Setting p = 2 and k = 2(a −1) we obtain \psi(n) = an for n = 22(a−1).
(c) We note that \psi(pp) = pp+1 if p is a prime. Hence, if a has an odd prime
factor p and a1 = a/p, then x = pp22a1−2 is a solution of \psi(x) = ax
diﬀerent from x = 22a−2.
Now assume that a = 2k for some k \inN. Suppose x = 2\alphay is a positive
integer such that \psi(x) = 2kx. Then 2\alpha+ky = \psi(x) = \psi(2\alpha)\psi(y) =
(\alpha+2)2\alpha−1\psi(y), i.e., 2k+1y = (\alpha+2)\psi(y). We notice that for each odd
y, \psi(y) is (by deﬁnition) the sum of an odd number of odd summands
and therefore odd. It follows that \psi(y) | y. On the other hand, \psi(y) >
y for y > 1, so we must have y = 1. Consequently \alpha = 2k+1−2 = 2a−2,
giving us the unique solution x = 22a−2.
Thus \psi(x) = ax has a unique solution if and only if a is a power of 2.
