---
title: "IMO 2004 SL N5"
description: "We call a positive integer alternate if its decimal digits"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 5
origin: "IRN"
weight: 200404005
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL N5

**Origin:** IRN  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

We call a positive integer alternate if its decimal digits
are alternately odd and even. Find all positive integers n such that n has
an alternate multiple.

## Solution

If n is divisible by 20, then every multiple of n has two last digits even and
hence it is not alternate. We shall show that any other n has an alternate
multiple.
(i) Let n be coprime to 10. For each k there exists a number Ak(n) =
10 . . . 010 . . .01 . . .0 . . . 01 = 10mk−1
10k−1 (m \inN) that is divisible by n (by
Euler’s theorem, choose m = ϕ[n(10k −1)]). In particular, A2(n) is
alternate.

(ii) Let n = 2 \cdot 5r \cdot n1, where r \geq1 and (n1, 10) = 1. We shall show by
induction that, for each k, there exists an alternative k-digit odd num-
ber Mk that is divisible by 5k. Choosing the number 10A2r(n1)M2r
will then solve this case, since it is clearly alternate and divisible by
n.
We can trivially choose M1 = 5. Let there be given an alternate r-digit
multiple Mr of 5r, and let c \in{0, 1, 2, 3, 4} be such that Mr/5r \equiv
−c \cdot 2r (mod 5). Then the (r + 1)digit numbers Mr + c \cdot 10r and
Mr + (5 + c) \cdot 10r are respectively equal to 5r(Mr/5r + 2r \cdot c) and
5r(Mr/5r + 2r \cdot c + 5 \cdot 2r), and hence they are divisible by 5r+1 and
exactly one of them is alternate: we set it to be Mr+1.
(iii) Let n = 2r\cdotn1, where r \geq1 and (n1, 10) = 1. We show that there exists
an alternate 2r-digit number Nr that is divisible by 22r+1. Choosing
the number A2r(n1)Nr will then solve this case.
We choose N1 = 16, and given Nr, we can prove that one of Nr +
m \cdot 102r, for m \in{10, 12, 14, 16}, is divisible by 22r+3 and therefore
suitable for Nr+1. Indeed, for Nr = 22r+1d we have Nr + m \cdot 102r =
22r+1(d + 5rm/2) and d + 5rm/2 \equiv0 (mod 4) has a solution m/2 \in
{5, 6, 7, 8} for each d and r.
Remark. The idea is essentially the same as in (SL94-24).
