---
title: "IMO 2004 SL N6"
description: "Given an integer n > 1, denote by Pn the product of all"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 6
origin: "IRE"
weight: 200404006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL N6

**Origin:** IRE  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Given an integer n > 1, denote by Pn the product of all
positive integers x less than n and such that n divides x2 −1. For each
n > 1, ﬁnd the remainder of Pn on division by n.

## Solution

Let Sn = {x \inN | x \leqn, n | x2 −1}. It is easy to check that Pn \equiv1
(mod n) for n = 2 and Pn \equiv−1 (mod n) for n \in{3, 4}, so from now on
we assume n > 4.
We note that if x \inSn, then also n−x \inSn and (x, n) = 1. Thus Sn splits
into pairs {x, n −x}, where x \inSn and x \leqn/2. In each of these pairs
the product of elements gives remainder −1 upon division by n. Therefore
Pn \equiv(−1)m, where Sn has 2m elements. It remains to ﬁnd the parity of
m.
Suppose ﬁrst that n > 4 is divisible by 4. Whenever x \inSn, the numbers
|n/2−x|, n−x, n−|n/2−x| also belong to Sn (indeed, n | (n/2−x)2−1 =
n2/4 −nx + x2 −1 because n | n2/4, etc.). In this way the set Sn splits
into four-element subsets {x, n/2 −x, n/2 + x, n −x}, where x \inSn and
x < n/4 (elements of these subsets are diﬀerent for x ̸= n/4, and n/4
doesn’t belong to Sn for n > 4). Therefore m = |Sn|/2 is even and Pn \equiv1
(mod m).
Now let n be odd. If n | x2 −1 = (x −1)(x + 1), then there exist natural
numbers a, b such that ab = n, a | x −1, b | x + 1. Obviously a and b
are coprime. Conversely, given any odd a, b \inN such that (a, b) = 1 and
ab = n, by the Chinese remainder theorem there exists x \in{1, 2, . . ., n−1}
such that a | x−1 and b | x+1. This gives a bijection between all ordered
pairs (a, b) with ab = n and (a, b) = 1 and the elements of Sn. Now if
n = p\alpha1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot p\alphak
k
is the decomposition of n into primes, the number of pairs
(a, b) is equal to 2k (since for every i, either p\alphai
i
| a or p\alphai
i
| b), and hence

m = 2k−1. Thus Pn \equiv−1 (mod n) if n is a power of an odd prime, and
Pn \equiv1 otherwise.
Finally, let n be even but not divisible by 4. Then x \inSn if and only
if x or n −x belongs to Sn/2 and x is odd. Since n/2 is odd, for each
x \inSn/2 either x or x + n/2 belongs to Sn, and by the case of n odd we
have Sn \equiv\pm1 (mod n/2), depending on whether or not n/2 is a power
of a prime. Since Sn is odd, it follows that Pn \equiv−1 (mod n) if n/2 is a
power of a prime, and Pn \equiv1 otherwise.
Second solution. Obviously Sn is closed under multiplication modulo n.
This implies that Sn with multiplication modulo n is a subgroup of Zn,
and therefore there exist elements a1 = −1, a2, . . . , ak \inSn that generate
Sn. In other words, since the ai are of order two, Sn consists of products
$
i\inA ai, where A runs over all subsets of {1, 2, . . ., k}. Thus Sn has 2k
elements, and the product of these elements equals Pn \equiv(a1a2 \cdot \cdot \cdot ak)2k−1
(mod n). Since a2
i \equiv1 (mod n), it follows that Pn \equiv1 if k \geq2, i.e., if
|Sn| > 2. Otherwise Pn \equiv−1 (mod n).
We note that |Sn| > 2 is equivalent to the existence of a \inSn with
1 < a < n−1. It is easy to ﬁnd that such an a exists if and only if neither
of n, n/2 is a power of an odd prime.
