---
title: "IMO 2004 SL N7"
description: "Let p be an odd prime and n a positive integer. In the"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2004
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 7
origin: "BUL"
weight: 200404007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2004 SL N7

**Origin:** BUL  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Let p be an odd prime and n a positive integer. In the
coordinate plane, eight distinct points with integer coordinates lie on a
circle with diameter of length pn. Prove that there exists a triangle with
vertices at three of the given points such that the squares of its side lengths
are integers divisible by pn+1.

## Solution

We shall denote by k the given circle with diameter pn.
Let A, B be lattice points (i.e., points with integer coordinates). We shall
denote by µ(AB) the exponent of the highest power of p that divides the
integer AB2. We observe that if S is the area of a triangle ABC where
A, B, C are lattice points, then 2S is an integer. According to Heron’s
formula and the formula for the circumradius, a triangle ABC whose
circumcenter has diameter pn satisﬁes
2AB2BC2 + 2BC2CA2 + 2CA2AB2 −AB4 −BC4 −CA4 = 16S2 (1)
and
AB2 \cdot BC2 \cdot CA2 = (2S)2p2n.
(2)
Lemma 1. Let A, B, and C be lattice points on k. If none of AB2, BC2,
CA2 is divisible by pn+1, then µ(AB), µ(BC), µ(CA) are 0, n, n in
some order.
Proof.
Let k = min{µ(AB), µ(BC), µ(CA)}. By (1), (2S)2 is divisible
by p2k. Together with (2), this gives us µ(AB) + µ(BC) + µ(CA) =
2k + 2n. On the other hand, if none of AB2, BC2, CA2 is divisible by
pn+1, then µ(AB) + µ(BC) + µ(CA) \leqk + 2n. Therefore k = 0 and
the remaining two of µ(AB), µ(BC), µ(CA) are equal to n.
Lemma 2.
Among every four lattice points on k, there exist two, say
M, N, such that µ(MN) \geqn + 1.
Proof.
Assume that this doesn’t hold for some points A, B, C, D on k.
By Lemma 1, µ for some of the segments AB, AC, . . . , CD is 0, say
µ(AC) = 0. It easily follows by Lemma 1 that then µ(BD) = 0 and
µ(AB) = µ(BC) = µ(CD) = µ(DA) = n. Let a, b, c, d, e, f \inN be

such that AB2 = pna, BC2 = pnb, CD2 = pnc, DA2 = pnd, AC2 = e,
BD2 = f. By Ptolemy’s theorem we have \sqrtef = pn \sqrtac +
\sqrt
bd

.
Taking squares, we get that
ef
p2n =
\sqrtac +
\sqrt
bd
= ac + bd + 2
\sqrt
abcd
is rational and hence an integer. It follows that ef is divisible by p2n,
a contradiction.
Now we consider eight lattice points A1, A2, . . . , A8 on k. We color each
segment AiAj red if µ(AiAj) > n and black otherwise, and thus obtain
a graph G. The degree of a point X will be the number of red segments
with an endpoint in X. We distinguish three cases:
(i) There is a point, say A8, whose degree is at most 1. We may suppose
w.l.o.g. that A8A7 is red and A8A1, . . . , A8A6 black. By a well-known
fact, the segments joining vertices A1, A2, . . . , A6 determine either a
red triangle, in which case there is nothing to prove, or a black triangle,
say A1A2A3. But in the latter case the four points A1, A2, A3, A8 do
not determine any red segment, a contradiction to Lemma 2.
(ii) All points have degree 2. Then the set of red segments partitions into
cycles. If one of these cycles has length 3, then the proof is complete. If
all the cycles have length at least 4, then we have two possibilities: two
4-cycles, say A1A2A3A4 and A5A6A7A8, or one 8-cycle, A1A2 . . . A8.
In both cases, the four points A1, A3, A5, A7 do not determine any red
segment, a contradiction.
(iii) There is a point of degree at least 3, say A1. Suppose that A1A2,
A1A3, and A1A4 are red. We claim that A2, A3, A4 determine at least
one red segment, which will complete the solution. If not, by Lemma
1, µ(A2A3), µ(A3A4), µ(A4A2) are n, n, 0 in some order. Assuming
w.l.o.g. that µ(A2A3) = 0, denote by S the area of triangle A1A2A3.
Now by formula (1), 2S is not divisible by p. On the other hand, since
µ(A1A2) \geqn + 1 and µ(A1A3) \geqn + 1, it follows from (2) that 2S is
divisible by p, a contradiction.

A
Notation and Abbreviations
A.1 Notation
We assume familiarity with standard elementary notation of set theory, alge-
bra, logic, geometry (including vectors), analysis, number theory (including
divisibility and congruences), and combinatorics. We use this notation liber-
ally.
We assume familiarity with the basic elements of the game of chess (the move-
ment of pieces and the coloring of the board).
The following is notation that deserves additional clariﬁcation.
◦B(A, B, C), A −B −C: indicates the relation of betweenness, i.e., that B
is between A and C (this automatically means that A, B, C are diﬀerent
collinear points).
◦A = l1 \capl2: indicates that A is the intersection point of the lines l1 and
l2.
◦AB: line through A and B, segment AB, length of segment AB (depending
on context).
◦[AB: ray starting in A and containing B.
◦(AB: ray starting in A and containing B, but without the point A.
◦(AB): open interval AB, set of points between A and B.
◦[AB]: closed interval AB, segment AB, (AB) \cup{A, B}.
◦(AB]: semiopen interval AB, closed at B and open at A, (AB) \cup{B}.
The same bracket notation is applied to real numbers, e.g., [a, b) = {x |
a \leqx < b}.
◦ABC: plane determined by points A, B, C, triangle ABC (\triangleABC) (de-
pending on context).
◦[AB, C: half-plane consisting of line AB and all points in the plane on the
same side of AB as C.

A Notation and Abbreviations
◦(AB, C: [AB, C without the line AB.
◦⟨−\toa , −\tob ⟩, −\toa \cdot −\tob : scalar product of −\toa and −\tob .
◦a, b, c, \alpha, \beta, \gamma: the respective sides and angles of triangle ABC (unless oth-
erwise indicated).
◦k(O, r): circle k with center O and radius r.
◦d(A, p): distance from point A to line p.
◦SA1A2...An: area of n-gon A1A2 . . . An (special case for n = 3, SABC: area
of \triangleABC).
◦N, Z, Q, R, C: the sets of natural, integer, rational, real, complex numbers
(respectively).
◦Zn: the ring of residues modulo n, n \inN.
◦Zp: the ﬁeld of residues modulo p, p being prime.
◦Z[x], R[x]: the rings of polynomials in x with integer and real coeﬃcients
respectively.
◦R∗: the set of nonzero elements of a ring R.
◦R[\alpha], R(\alpha), where \alpha is a root of a quadratic polynomial in R[x]: {a + b\alpha |
a, b \inR}.
◦X0: X \cup{0} for X such that 0 /\inX.
◦X+, X−, aX + b, aX + bY : {x | x \inX, x > 0}, {x | x \inX, x < 0},
{ax + b | x \inX}, {ax + by | x \inX, y \inY } (respectively) for X, Y \subseteqR,
a, b \inR.
◦[x], \lfloorx\rfloor: the greatest integer smaller than or equal to x.
◦\lceilx\rceil: the smallest integer greater than or equal to x.
The following is notation simultaneously used in diﬀerent concepts (depending
on context).
◦|AB|, |x|, |S|: the distance between two points AB, the absolute value of
the number x, the number of elements of the set S (respectively).
◦(x, y), (m, n), (a, b): (ordered) pair x and y, the greatest common divisor
of integers m and n, the open interval between real numbers a and b
(respectively).
A.2 Abbreviations
We tried to avoid using nonstandard notations and abbreviations as much
as possible. However, one nonstandard abbreviation stood out as particularly
convenient:

A.2 Abbreviations
◦w.l.o.g.: without loss of generality.
Other abbreviations include:
◦RHS: right-hand side (of a given equation).
◦LHS: left-hand side (of a given equation).
◦QM, AM, GM, HM: the quadratic mean, the arithmetic mean, the geo-
metric mean, the harmonic mean (respectively).
◦gcd, lcm: greatest common divisor, least common multiple (respectively).
◦i.e.: in other words.
◦e.g.: for example.

B
Codes of the Countries of Origin
ARG
Argentina
ARM
Armenia
AUS
Australia
AUT
Austria
BEL
Belgium
BLR
Belarus
BRA
Brazil
BUL
Bulgaria
CAN
Canada
CHN
China
COL
Colombia
CUB
Cuba
CYP
Cyprus
CZE
Czech Republic
CZS
Czechoslovakia
EST
Estonia
FIN
Finland
FRA
France
FRG
Germany, FR
GBR
United Kingdom
GDR
Germany, DR
GEO
Georgia
GER
Germany
GRE
Greece
HKG
Hong Kong
HUN
Hungary
ICE
Iceland
INA
Indonesia
IND
India
IRE
Ireland
IRN
Iran
ISR
Israel
ITA
Italy
JAP
Japan
KAZ
Kazakhstan
KOR
Korea, South
KUW
Kuwait
LAT
Latvia
LIT
Lithuania
LUX
Luxembourg
MCD
Macedonia
MEX
Mexico
MON
Mongolia
MOR
Morocco
NET
Netherlands
NOR
Norway
NZL
New Zealand
PHI
Philippines
POL
Poland
POR
Portugal
PRK
Korea, North
PUR
Puerto Rico
ROM
Romania
RUS
Russia
SAF
South Africa
SIN
Singapore
SLO
Slovenia
SMN
Serbia and Montenegro
SPA
Spain
SWE
Sweden
THA
Thailand
TUN
Tunisia
TUR
Turkey
TWN Taiwan
UKR
Ukraine
USA
United States
USS
Soviet Union
UZB
Uzbekistan
VIE
Vietnam
YUG
Yugoslavia

References
1. M. Aassila, 300 D´eﬁs Math´ematiques, Ellipses, 2001.
2. M. Aigner, G.M. Ziegler, Proofs from THE BOOK, Springer; 3rd edition, 2003.
3. G.L. Alexanderson, L.F. Klosinski, L.C. Larson, The William Lowell Putnam
Mathematical Competition, Problems and Solutions: 1965-1984, The Mathemat-
ical Association of America, 1985.
4. T. Andreescu, D. Andrica, 360 Problems for Mathematical Contests, GIL Pub-
lishing House, Zal˘au, 2003.
5. T. Andreescu, D. Andrica, An Introduction to the Diophantine Equations, GIL
Publishing House, 2002.
6. T. Andreescu, D. Andrica, Complex Numbers from A to ... Z, Birkh¨auser,
Boston, 2005.
7. T. Andreescu, B. Enescu, Mathematical Treasures, Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2003.
8. T. Andreescu, Z. Feng, 102 Combinatorial Problems, Birkh¨auser Boston, 2002.
9. T. Andreescu, Z. Feng, 103 Trigonometry Problems: From the Training of the
USA IMO Team, Birkh¨auser Boston, 2004.
10. T. Andreescu, Z. Feng, Mathematical Olympiads 1998-1999, Problems and Solu-
tions from Around the World, The Mathematical Association of America, 2000.
11. T. Andreescu, Z. Feng, Mathematical Olympiads 1999-2000, Problems and Solu-
tions from Around the World, The Mathematical Association of America, 2002.
12. T. Andreescu, Z. Feng, Mathematical Olympiads 2000-2001, Problems and Solu-
tions from Around the World, The Mathematical Association of America, 2003.
13. T. Andreescu, R. Gelca, Mathematical Olympiad Challenges, Birkh¨auser, Bos-
ton, 2000.
14. T. Andreescu, K. Kedlaya, Mathematical Contests 1996-1997, Olympiads Prob-
lems and Solutions from Around the World, American Mathematics Competi-
tions, 1998.
15. T. Andreescu, K. Kedlaya, Mathematical Contests 1997-1998, Olympiads Prob-
lems and Solutions from Around the World, American Mathematics Competi-
tions, 1999.
16. T. Andreescu, V. Cartoaje, G. Dospinescu, M. Lascu, Old and New Inequalities,
GIL Publishing House, 2004.
17. M. Arsenovi´c, V. Dragovi´c, Functional Equations (in Serbian), Mathematical
Society of Serbia, Beograd, 1999.

References
18. M. Aˇsi´c et al., International Mathematical Olympiads (in Serbian), Mathemat-
ical Society of Serbia, Beograd, 1986.
19. M. Aˇsi´c et al., 60 Problems for XIX IMO (in Serbian), Society of Mathemati-
cians, Physicists, and Astronomers, Beograd, 1979.
20. A. Baker, A Concise Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 1984.
21. E.J. Barbeau, Polynomials, Springer, 2003.
22. E.J. Barbeau, M.S. Klamkin, W.O.J. Moser, Five Hundred Mathematical Chal-
lenges, The Mathematical Association of America, 1995.
23. E.J. Barbeau, Pell’s Equation, Springer-Verlag, 2003.
24. M. Becheanu, International Mathematical Olympiads 1959-2000. Problems. So-
lutions. Results, Academic Distribution Center, Freeland, USA, 2001.
25. E.L. Berlekamp, J.H. Conway, R.K. Guy, Winning Ways for Your Mathematical
Plays, AK Peters, Ltd., 2nd edition, 2001.
26. G. Berzsenyi, S.B. Maurer, The Contest Problem Book V, The Mathematical
Association of America, 1997.
27. P.S. Bullen, D.S. Mitrinovi´c , M. Vasi´c, Means and Their Inequalities, Springer,
1989.
28. H.S.M. Coxeter, Introduction to Geometry, John Willey & Sons, New York, 1969
29. H.S.M. Coxeter, S.L. Greitzer, Geometry Revisited, Random House, New York,
1967.
30. I. Cuculescu, International Mathematical Olympiads for Students (in Roma-
nian), Editura Tehnica, Bucharest, 1984.
