---
title: "IMO 1973 SL 14"
description: "A soldier has to investigate whether there are mines in an"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1973
type: "shortlist"
number: 14
origin: "YUG"
weight: 197300014
draft: false
---

# IMO 1973 SL 14

**Origin:** YUG

## Problem

A soldier has to investigate whether there are mines in an
area that has the form of an equilateral triangle. The radius of his detector
is equal to one-half of an altitude of the triangle. The soldier starts from
one vertex of the triangle. Determine the shortest path that the soldier
has to traverse in order to check the whole region.

## Solution

Suppose that the soldier starts at
the vertex A of the equilateral tri-
angle ABC of side length a. Let ϕ, \psi
be the arcs of circles with centers B
and C and radii a
\sqrt
3/4 respectively,
that lie inside the triangle. In order
to check the vertices B, C, he must
visit some points D \inϕ and E \in\psi.
A
B
C
D
E
F
M
N
ϕ
\psi
Thus his path cannot be shorter than the path ADE (or AED) itself.
The length of the path ADE is AD +DE \geqAD +DC −a
\sqrt
3/4. Let F be
the reﬂection of C across the line MN, where M, N are the midpoints of
AB and BC. Then DC \geqDF and hence AD + DC \geqAD + DF \geqAF.
Consequently AD + DE \geqAF −a
\sqrt
= a
 \sqrt
2 −
\sqrt

, with equality if
and only if D is the midpoint of arc ϕ and E = (CD) \cap\psi.

Moreover, it is easy to verify that, in following the path ADE, the soldier
will check the whole region. Therefore this path (as well as the one sym-
metric to it) is shortest possible path that the soldier can take in order to
check the entire ﬁeld.
