---
title: "IMO 2002 SL A6"
description: "Let A be a nonempty set of positive integers. Suppose that"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2002
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 6
origin: "IRN"
weight: 200201006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2002 SL A6

**Origin:** IRN  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Let A be a nonempty set of positive integers. Suppose that
there are positive integers b1, . . . , bn and c1, . . . , cn such that
(i) for each i the set biA + ci = {bia + ci | a \inA} is a subset of A, and
(ii) the sets biA + ci and bjA + cj are disjoint whenever i ̸= j.
Prove that
b1
+ \cdot \cdot \cdot + 1
bn
\leq1.

## Solution

Assume to the contrary that
b1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot +
bn > 1. Certainly n \geq2 and A is
inﬁnite. Deﬁne fi : A \toA as fi(x) = bix+ci for each i. By condition (ii),
fi(x) = fj(y) implies i = j and x = y; iterating this argument, we deduce
that fi1(. . . fim(x) . . . ) = fj1(. . . fjm(x) . . . ) implies i1 = j1, . . . , im = jm
and x = y.
As an illustration, we shall consider the case b1 = b2 = b3 = 2 ﬁrst. If a is
large enough, then for any i1, . . . , im \in{1, 2, 3} we have fi1 ◦\cdot \cdot \cdot◦fim(a) \leq
2.1ma. However, we obtain 3m values in this way, so they cannot be all
distinct if m is suﬃciently large, a contradiction.
In the general case, let real numbers di > bi, i = 1, 2 . . . , n, be chosen such
that
d1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot +
dn > 1: for a large enough, fi(x) < dia for each x \geqa.

Also, let ki > 0 be arbitrary rational numbers with sum 1; denote by N0
the least common multiple of their denominators.
Let N be a ﬁxed multiple of N0, so that each kjN is an integer. Consider all
combinations fi1 ◦\cdot \cdot \cdot ◦fiN of N functions, among which each fi appears
exactly kiN times. There are FN =
N!
(k1N)!\cdot\cdot\cdot(knN)! such combinations,
so they give FN distinct values when applied to a. On the other hand,
fi1 ◦\cdot \cdot \cdot ◦fiN(a) \leq(dk1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot dkn
n )Na. Therefore
(dk1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot dkn
n )Na \geqFN
for all N, N0 | N.
(1)
It remains to ﬁnd a lower estimate for FN. In fact, it is straightforward to
verify that FN+N0/FN tends to QN0, where Q = 1/

kk1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot kkn
n

. Conse-
quently, for every q < Q there exists p > 0 such that FN > pqN. Then (1)
implies that

dk1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot dkn
n
q
N
> p
a for every multiple N of N0,
and hence dk1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot dkn
n /q \geq1. This must hold for every q < Q, and so we
have dk1
1 \cdot \cdot \cdot dkn
n \geqQ, i.e.,
(k1d1)k1 \cdot \cdot \cdot (kndn)kn \geq1.
However, if we choose k1, . . . , kn such that k1d1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = kndn = u, then
we must have u \geq1. Therefore
d1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot +
dn \leqk1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + kn = 1, a
contradiction.
