---
title: "IMO 2002 SL C7"
description: "Among a group of 120 people, some pairs are friends. A weak"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2002
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 7
origin: "NZL"
weight: 200202007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2002 SL C7

**Origin:** NZL  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Among a group of 120 people, some pairs are friends. A weak
quartet is a set of four people containing exactly one pair of friends. What
is the maximum possible number of weak quartets?

## Solution

For a graph G on 120 vertices (i.e., people at the party), write q(G) for
the number of weak quartets in G. Our solution will consist of three parts.
First, we prove that some graph G with maximal q(G) breaks up as a
disjoint union of complete graphs. This will follow if we show that any two
adjacent vertices x, y have the same neighbors (apart from themselves).
Let Gx be the graph obtained from G by “copying” x to y (i.e., for each
z ̸= x, y, we add the edge zy if zx is an edge, and delete zy if zx is not an
edge). Similarly Gy is the graph obtained from G by copying y to x. We
claim that 2q(G) \leqq(Gx) + q(Gy). Indeed, the number of weak quartets
containing neither x nor y is the same in G, Gx, and Gy, while the number
of those containing both x and y is not less in Gx and Gy than in G. Also,
the number containing exactly one of x and y in Gx is at least twice the
number in G containing x but not y, while the number containing exactly
one of x and y in Gy is at least twice the number in G containing y but
not x. This justiﬁes our claim by adding. It follows that for an extremal
graph G we must have q(G) = q(Gx) = q(Gy). Repeating the copying
operation pair by pair (y to x, then their common neighbor z to both
x, y, etc.) we eventually obtain an extremal graph consisting of disjoint
complete graphs.
Second, suppose the complete graphs in G have sizes a1, a2, . . . , an. Then

q(G) =
n

i=1
ai
 
j<k
j,k̸=i
ajak.
If we ﬁx all the ai except two, say p, q, then p + q = s is ﬁxed, and for
some constants Ci, q(G) = C1+C2pq+C3
p

+
q

+C4

q
p

+ p
q

=
A + Bpq, where A and B depend only on s. Hence the maximum of q(G)
is attained if |p −q| \leq1 or pq = 0. Thus if q(G) is maximal, any two
nonzero ai’s diﬀer by at most 1.
Finally, if G consists of n disjoint complete graphs, then q(G) cannot
exceed the value obtained if a1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = an (not necessarily integral),
which equals
Qn = 1202
n
120/n
n −1

= 30 \cdot 1202 (n −1)(n −2)(120 −n)
n3
.
It is easy to check that Qn takes its maximum when n = 5 and a1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot =
a5 = 24, and that this maximum equals 15 \cdot 23 \cdot 243 = 4769280.
