---
title: "IMO 2002 SL G5"
description: "For any set S of ﬁve points in the plane, no three of which"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2002
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 5
origin: "AUS"
weight: 200203005
draft: false
---

# IMO 2002 SL G5

**Origin:** AUS  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

For any set S of ﬁve points in the plane, no three of which
are collinear, let M(S) and m(S) denote the greatest and smallest areas,
respectively, of triangles determined by three points from S. What is the
minimum possible value of M(S)/m(S)?

## Solution

When S is the set of vertices of a regular pentagon, then it is easily
veriﬁed that M(S)
m(S) = 1+
\sqrt
= \alpha. We claim that this is the best possible.
Let A, B, C, D, E be ﬁve arbitrary points, and assume that \triangleABC has
the area M(S). We claim that some triangle has area less than or equal
to M(S)/\alpha.
Construct a larger triangle A′B′C′ with C \inA′B′ \parallelAB, A \inB′C′ \parallelBC,
B \inC′A′ \parallelCA. The point D, as well as E, must lie on the same side of
B′C′ as BC, for otherwise \triangleDBC would have greater area than \triangleABC.
A similar result holds for the other edges, and therefore D, E lie inside the
triangle A′B′C′ or on its boundary. Moreover, at least one of the triangles
A′BC, AB′C, ABC′, say ABC′, contains neither D nor E. Hence we can
assume that D, E are contained inside the quadrilateral A′B′AB.
An aﬃne linear transformation does not change the ratios between areas.
Thus if we apply such an aﬃne transformation mapping A, B, C into the
vertices ABMCN of a regular pentagon, we won’t change M(S)/m(S).
If now D or E lies inside ABMCN, then we are done. Suppose that both
D and E are inside the triangles CMA′, CNB′. Then CD, CE \leqCM
(because CM = CN = CA′ = CB′) and \angleDCE is either less than or
equal to 36◦or greater than or equal to 108◦, from which we obtain that
the area of \triangleCDE cannot exceed the area of \triangleCMN = M(S)/\alpha. This
completes the proof.
