---
title: "IMO 2002 SL G6"
description: "Let n \geq3 be a positive integer. Let C1, C2, C3, . . . , Cn"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2002
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 6
origin: "UKR"
weight: 200203006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2002 SL G6

**Origin:** UKR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Let n \geq3 be a positive integer. Let C1, C2, C3, . . . , Cn
be unit circles in the plane, with centers O1, O2, O3, . . . , On respectively.
If no line meets more than two of the circles, prove that

1\leqi<j\leqn
OiOj
\leq(n −1)\pi
.

## Solution

Let l(MN) denote the length of the shorter arc MN of a given circle.

Lemma. Let PR, QS be two chords of a circle k of radius r that meet each
other at a point X, and let \anglePXQ = \angleRXS = 2\alpha. Then l(PQ) +
l(RS) = 4\alphar.
Proof. Let O be the center of the circle. Then l(PQ) + l(RS) = \anglePOQ \cdot
r + \angleROS \cdot r = 2(\angleQSP + \angleRPS)r = 2\angleQXP \cdot r = 4\alphar.
Consider a circle k, suﬃciently large, whose interior contains all the given
circles. For any two circles Ci, Cj, let their exterior common tangents
PR, QS (P, Q, R, S \ink) form an angle 2\alpha. Then OiOj =
sin \alpha, so \alpha >
sin \alpha =
OiOj . By the lemma we have l(PQ) + l(RS) = 4\alphar \geq
8r
OiOj , and
hence
OiOj
\leql(PQ) + l(RS)
8r
.
(1)
Now sum all these inequalities for i < j. The result will follow if we show
that every point of the circle k belongs to at most n −1 arcs such as
PQ, RS. Indeed, that will imply that the sum of all the arcs is at most
2(n −1)\pir, hence from (1) we conclude that 
OiOj \leq(n−1)\pi
.
Consider an arbitrary point T of k. We prove by induction (the basis n = 1
is trivial) that the number of pairs of circles that are simultaneously in-
tercepted by a ray from T is at most n −1. Let Tu be a ray touching k
at T . If we let this ray rotate around T , it will at some moment intercept
a pair of circles for the ﬁrst time, say C1, C2. At some further moment
the interception with one of these circles, say C1, is lost and never estab-
lished again. Thus the pair (C1, C2) is the only pair containing C1 that
is intercepted by some ray from T . On the other hand, by the inductive
hypothesis the number of such pairs not containing C1 does not exceed
n −2, justifying our claim.
