---
title: "IMO 2002 SL G7"
description: "The incircle Ωof the acute-angled triangle ABC is tangent"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2002
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 7
origin: "BUL"
weight: 200203007
draft: false
---

# IMO 2002 SL G7

**Origin:** BUL  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

The incircle Ωof the acute-angled triangle ABC is tangent
to BC at K. Let AD be an altitude of triangle ABC and let M be the
midpoint of AD. If N is the other common point of Ωand KM, prove
that Ωand the circumcircle of triangle BCN are tangent at N.

## Solution

Let k be the circle through B, C that is tangent to the circle Ωat point N ′.
We must prove that K, M, N ′ are collinear. Since the statement is trivial
for AB = AC, we may assume that AC > AB. As usual, R, r, \alpha, \beta, \gamma
denote the circumradius and the inradius and the angles of \triangleABC, re-
spectively.
We have tan \angleBKM
= DM/DK. Straightforward calculation gives
DM = 1
2AD = R sin \beta sin \gamma and DK = DC−DB
−KC−KB
= R sin(\beta −
\gamma) −R(sin \beta −sin \gamma) = 4R sin \beta−\gamma
sin \beta
2 sin \gamma
2, so we obtain
tan \angleBKM =
sin \beta sin \gamma
4 sin \beta−\gamma
sin \beta
2 sin \gamma
= cos \beta
2 cos \gamma
sin \beta−\gamma
.
To calculate the angle BKN ′, we
apply the inversion \psi with center
at K and power BK \cdotCK. For each
object X, we denote by <
X its image
under \psi. The incircle Ωmaps to a
K
B
C
A
k
Ω
N
−\to
\psi
<B
<C
<U
<
N
<Ω
K
<k

line <Ωparallel to <B <C, at distance BK\cdotCK
2r
from <B <C. Thus the point @
N ′ is
the projection of the midpoint <U of <B <C onto <Ω. Hence
tan \angleBKN ′ = tan \angle<BK @
N ′ =
<U @
N ′
<UK
=
BK \cdot CK
r(CK −BK).
Again, one easily checks that KB \cdot KC = bc sin2 \alpha
2 and r = 4R sin \alpha
2 \cdot
sin \beta
2 \cdot sin \gamma
2 , which implies
tan \angleBKN ′ = bc sin2 \alpha
r(b −c)
=
4R2 sin \beta sin \gamma sin2 \alpha
4R sin \alpha
2 sin \beta
2 sin \gamma
2 \cdot 2R(sin \beta −sin \gamma)
= cos \beta
2 cos \gamma
sin \beta−\gamma
.
Hence \angleBKM = \angleBKN ′, which implies that K, M, N ′ are indeed
collinear; thus N ′ \equivN.
