---
title: "IMO 2002 SL N4"
description: "Is there a positive integer m such that the equation"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "number theory"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2002
type: "shortlist"
category: "N"
category_name: "Number Theory"
number: 4
origin: "GER"
weight: 200204004
draft: false
---

# IMO 2002 SL N4

**Origin:** GER  |  **Category:** Number Theory

## Problem

Is there a positive integer m such that the equation
a + 1
b + 1
c + 1
abc =
m
a + b + c
has in’¼ünitely many solutions in positive integers a, b, c?

## Solution

For a = b = c = 1 we obtain m = 12. We claim that the given equation
has in’¼ünitely many solutions in positive integers a, b, c for this value of m.
After multiplication by abc(a+b+c) the equation 1
a+ 1
b+ 1
c+ 1
abcŌłÆ
a+b+c = 0
becomes
a2(b + c) + b2(c + a) + c2(a + b) + a + b + c ŌłÆ9abc = 0.
(1)
We must show that this equation has in’¼ünitely many solutions in positive
integers. Suppose that (a, b, c) is one such solution with a < b < c. Re-
garding (1) as a quadratic equation in a, we see by VietaŌĆÖs formula that

b, c, bc+1
a

also satis’¼ües (1).

De’¼üne (an)\infty
n=0 by a0 = a1 = a2 = 1 and an+1 = ananŌłÆ1+1
anŌłÆ2
for each
n > 1.
We show that all anŌĆÖs are integers. This procedure is fairly standard.
The above relation for n and n ŌłÆ1 gives an+1anŌłÆ2 = ananŌłÆ1 + 1 and
anŌłÆ1anŌłÆ2 + 1 = ananŌłÆ3, so that adding yields anŌłÆ2(anŌłÆ1 + an+1) =
an(anŌłÆ1 + anŌłÆ3). Therefore an+1+anŌłÆ1
an
= anŌłÆ1+anŌłÆ3
anŌłÆ2
= \cdot \cdot \cdot , from which it
follows that
an+1 + anŌłÆ1
an
=
. a2+a0
a1
= 2 for n odd;
a3+a1
a2
= 3 for n even.
It is now an immediate consequence that every an is integral. Also, the
above consideration implies that (anŌłÆ1, an, an+1) is a solution of (1) for
each n \geq1. Since an is strictly increasing, this gives an in’¼ünity of solutions
in integers.
Remark. There are in’¼ünitely many values of m \inN for which the given
equation has at least one solution in integers, and each of those values
admits an in’¼ünity of solutions.
