---
title: "IMO 2000 SL A3"
description: "Find all pairs of functions f : R \toR, g : R \toR such that"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2000
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 3
origin: "BLR"
weight: 200001003
draft: false
---

# IMO 2000 SL A3

**Origin:** BLR  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Find all pairs of functions f : R \toR, g : R \toR such that
f(x + g(y)) = xf(y) −yf(x) + g(x)
for all x, y \inR.

## Solution

Let us ﬁrst solve the problem under the assumption that g(\alpha) = 0 for
some \alpha.
Setting y = \alpha in the given equation yields g(x) = (\alpha+1)f(x)−xf(\alpha). Then
the given equation becomes f(x+g(y)) = (\alpha+1−y)f(x)+(f(y)−f(\alpha))x,
so setting y = \alpha + 1 we get f(x + n) = mx, where n = g(\alpha + 1) and
m = f(\alpha + 1) −f(\alpha). Hence f is a linear function, and consequently g is
also linear. If we now substitute f(x) = ax + b and g(x) = cx + d in the
given equation and compare the coeﬃcients, we easily ﬁnd that

f(x) = cx −c2
1 + c
and
g(x) = cx −c2,
c \inR \ {−1}.
Now we prove the existence of \alpha such that g(\alpha) = 0. If f(0) = 0 then
putting y = 0 in the given equation we obtain f(x + g(0)) = g(x), so we
can take \alpha = −g(0).
Now assume that f(0) = b ̸= 0. By replacing x by g(x) in the given
equation we obtain f(g(x) + g(y)) = g(x)f(y) −yf(g(x)) + g(g(x)) and,
analogously, f(g(x) + g(y)) = g(y)f(x) −xf(g(y)) + g(g(y)). The given
functional equation for x = 0 gives f(g(y)) = a −by, where a = g(0). In
particular, g is injective and f is surjective, so there exists c \inR such
that f(c) = 0. Now the above two relations yield
g(x)f(y) −ay + g(g(x)) = g(y)f(x) −ax + g(g(y)).
(1)
Plugging y = c in (1) we get g(g(x)) = g(c)f(x) −ax + g(g(c)) + ac =
kf(x) −ax + d. Now (1) becomes g(x)f(y) + kf(x) = g(y)f(x) + kf(y).
For y = 0 we have g(x)b + kf(x) = af(x) + kb, whence
g(x) = a −k
b
f(x) + k.
Note that g(0) = a ̸= k = g(c), since g is injective. From the surjectivity
of f it follows that g is surjective as well, so it takes the value 0.
