---
title: "IMO 2000 SL A4"
description: "The function F is deﬁned on the set of nonnegative integers"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2000
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 4
origin: "GBR"
weight: 200001004
draft: false
---

# IMO 2000 SL A4

**Origin:** GBR  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

The function F is deﬁned on the set of nonnegative integers
and takes nonnegative integer values satisfying the following conditions:
For every n \geq0,
(i) F(4n) = F(2n) + F(n);
(ii) F(4n + 2) = F(4n) + 1;
(iii) F(2n + 1) = F(2n) + 1.
Prove that for each positive integer m, the number of integers n with
0 \leqn < 2m and F(4n) = F(3n) is F(2m+1).

## Solution

Clearly F(0) = 0 by (i). Moreover, it follows by induction from (i) that
F(2n) = fn+1 where fn denotes the nth Fibonacci’s number. In general, if
n = ϵk2k+ϵk−12k−1+\cdot \cdot \cdot+ϵ1\cdot2+ϵ0 (where ϵi \in{0, 1}), it is straightforward
to verify that
F(n) = ϵkfk+1 + ϵk−1fk + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ϵ1f2 + ϵ0f1.
(1)
We observe that if the binary representation of n contains no two adjacent
ones, then F(3n) = F(4n). Indeed, if n = ϵkr2kr + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ϵk02k0, where
ki+1 −ki \geq2 for all i, then 3n = ϵkr(2kr+1 + 2kr) + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ϵk0(2k0+1 + 2k0).
According to this, in computing F(3n) each fi+1 in (1) is replaced by
fi+1 + fi+2 = fi+3, leading to the value of F(4n).
We shall prove the converse: F(3n) \leqF(4n) holds for all n \geq0, with
equality if and only if the binary representation of n contains no two
adjacent ones.
We prove by induction on m \geq1 that this holds for all n satisfying 0 \leqn <
2m. The veriﬁcation for the early values of m is direct. Assume it is true
for a certain m and let 2m \leqn \leq2n+1. If n = 2m + p, 0 \leqp < 2m, then
(1) implies F(4n) = F(2m+2 + 4p) = fm+3 + F(4p). Now we distinguish
three cases:
(i) If 3p < 2m, then the binary representation of 3p does not carry into
that of 3 \cdot 2m. Then it follows from (1) and the induction hypothesis
that

F(3n) = F(3 \cdot2m)+F(3p) = fm+3 +F(3p) \leqfm+3 +F(4p) = F(4n).
Equality holds if and only if F(3p) = F(4p), i.e. p has no two adjacent
binary ones.
(ii) If 2m \leq3p < 2m+1, then the binary representation of 3p carries 1 into
that of 3\cdot2m. Thus F(3n) = fm+3+(F(3p)−fm+1) = fm+2+F(3p) <
fm+3 + F(4p) = F(4n).
(iii) If 2m+1 \leqp < 3 \cdot 2m, then the binary representation of 3p caries 10
into that of 3 \cdot 2m, which implies
F(3n) = fm+3 + fm+1 + (F(3p) −fm+2) = 2fm+1 + F(3p) < F(4n).
It remains to compute the number of integers in [0, 2m) with no two
adjacent binary 1’s. Denote their number by um. Among them there
are um−1 less than 2m−1 and um−2 in the segment [2m−1, 2m). Hence
um = um−1 + um−2 for m \geq3. Since u1 = 2 = f3, u2 = 3 = f4, we
conclude that um = fm+2 = F(2m+1).
