---
title: "IMO 2000 SL A5"
description: "Let n \geq2 be a positive integer and \lambda a positive real"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2000
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 5
origin: "BLR"
weight: 200001005
draft: false
---

# IMO 2000 SL A5

**Origin:** BLR  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Let n \geq2 be a positive integer and \lambda a positive real
number. Initially there are n ﬂeas on a horizontal line, not all at the same
point. We deﬁne a move of choosing two ﬂeas at some points A and B,
with A to the left of B, and letting the ﬂea from A jump over the ﬂea
from B to the point C such that BC/AB = \lambda.
Determine all values of \lambda such that for any point M on the line and for
any initial position of the n ﬂeas, there exists a sequence of moves that
will take them all to the position right of M.

## Solution

We claim that for \lambda \geq
n−1 we can take all ﬂeas as far to the right as
we want. In every turn we choose the leftmost ﬂea and let it jump over
the rightmost one. Let d and \delta denote the maximal and the minimal
distances between two ﬂeas at some moment. Clearly, d \geq(n −1)\delta. After
the leftmost ﬂea jumps over the rightmost one, the minimal distance does
not decrease, because \lambdad \geq\delta. However, the position of the leftmost ﬂea
moved to the right by at least \delta, and consequently we can move the ﬂeas
arbitrarily far to the right after a ﬁnite number of moves.
Suppose now that \lambda <
n−1. Under this assumption we shall prove that
there is a number M that cannot be reached by any ﬂea. Let us assign to
each ﬂea the coordinate on the real axis in which it is settled. Denote by
sk the sum of all the numbers in the kth step, and by wk the coordinate
of the rightmost ﬂea. Clearly, sk \leqnwk. We claim that the sequence wk
is bounded.
In the (k+1)th move let a ﬂea A jump over B, landing at C, and let a, b, c
be their respective coordinates. We have sk+1 −sk = c −a. Then by the
given rule, \lambda(b −a) = c −b = sk+1 −sk + a −b, which implies sk+1 −sk =
(1+\lambda)(b−a) = 1+\lambda
\lambda (c−b). Hence sk+1 −sk \geq1+\lambda
\lambda (wk+1 −wk). Summing
up these inequalities for k = 0, . . . , n −1 yields sn −s0 \geq1+\lambda
\lambda (wn −w0).
Now using sn \leqnwn we conclude that
1 + \lambda
\lambda
−n

wn \leq1 + \lambda
\lambda
w0 −s0.
Since 1+\lambda
\lambda
−n > 0, this proves the result.
