---
title: "IMO 2000 SL C3"
description: 'Let n \geq4 be a ﬁxed positive integer. Given a set S ='
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2000
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 3
origin: "COL"
weight: 200002003
draft: false
---

# IMO 2000 SL C3

**Origin:** COL  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let n \geq4 be a ﬁxed positive integer. Given a set S =
{P1, P2, . . . , Pn} of points in the plane such that no three are collinear
and no four concyclic, let at, 1 \leqt \leqn, be the number of circles PiPjPk
that contain Pt in their interior, and let
m(S) = a1 + a2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + an.
Prove that there exists a positive integer f(n), depending only on n, such
that the points of S are the vertices of a convex polygon if and only if
m(S) = f(n).

## Solution

Clearly m(S) is the number of pairs of point and triangle (Pt, PiPjPk)
such that Pt lies inside the circle PiPjPk. Consider any four-element set
Sijkl = {Pi, Pj, Pk, Pl}. If the convex hull of Sijkl is the triangle PiPjPk,
then we have ai = aj = ak = 0, al = 1. Suppose that the convex hull is

the quadrilateral PiPjPkPl. Since this quadrilateral is not cyclic, we may
suppose that \anglePi + \anglePk < 180◦< \anglePj + \anglePl. In this case ai = ak = 0
and aj = al = 1. Therefore m(Sijkl) is 2 if Pi, Pj, Pk, Pl are vertices of a
convex quadrilateral, and 1 otherwise.
There are
n

four-element subsets Sijkl. If a(S) is the number of such
subsets whose points determine a convex quadrilateral, we have m(S) =
2a(S) +
n

−a(S)

=
n

+ a(S) \leq2
n

. Equality holds if and only if
every four distinct points of S determine a convex quadrilateral, i.e. if and
only if the points of S determine a convex polygon. Hence f(n) = 2
n

has the desired property.
