---
title: "IMO 2000 SL C4"
description: 'Let n and k be positive integers such that n/2 < k \leq2n/3.'
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2000
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 4
origin: "CZE"
weight: 200002004
draft: false
---

# IMO 2000 SL C4

**Origin:** CZE  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let n and k be positive integers such that n/2 < k \leq2n/3.
Find the least number m for which it is possible to place m pawns on m
squares of an n \times n chessboard so that no column or row contains a block
of k adjacent unoccupied squares.

## Solution

By a good placement of pawns we mean the placement in which there is
no block of k adjacent unoccupied squares in a row or column.
We can make a good placement as follows: Label the rows and columns
with 0, 1, . . . , n −1 and place a pawn on a square (i, j) if and only if k
divides i + j + 1. This is obviously a good placement in which the pawns
are placed on three lines with k, 2n−2k, and 2n−3k squares, which adds
up to 4n −4k pawns in total.
Now we shall prove that a good
placement must contain at least
4n −4k pawns. Suppose we have a
good placement of m pawns. Parti-
tion the board into nine rectangular
regions as shown in the picture. Let
a, b, . . . , h be the numbers of pawns
in the rectangles A, B, . . . , H re-
spectively. Note that each row that
passes through A, B, and C either
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
n −k
n −k
n −k
n −k
2k −n
2k −n
contains a pawn inside B, or contains a pawn in both A and C. It follows
that a + c + 2b \geq2(n −k). We similarly obtain that c + e + 2d, e + g + 2f,
and g + a + 2h are all at least 2(n −k). Adding and dividing by 2 yields
a + b + \cdot \cdot \cdot + h \geq4(n −k), which proves the statement.
