---
title: "IMO 2000 SL C6"
description: "Let p and q be relatively prime positive integers. A subset"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 2000
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 6
origin: "FRA"
weight: 200002006
draft: false
---

# IMO 2000 SL C6

**Origin:** FRA  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let p and q be relatively prime positive integers. A subset
S of {0, 1, 2, . . .} is called ideal if 0 \inS and for each element n \inS,
the integers n + p and n + q belong to S. Determine the number of ideal
subsets of {0, 1, 2 . . .}.

## Solution

Every integer z has a unique representation z = px + qy, where x, y \inZ,
0 \leqx \leqq −1. Consider the region T in the xy-plane deﬁned by the last
inequality and px + qy \geq0. There is a bijective correspondence between
lattice points of this region and nonnegative integers given by (x, y) "\to
z = px + qy. Let us mark all lattice points of T whose corresponding
integers belong to S and color in black the unit squares whose left-bottom
vertices are at marked points. Due to the condition for S, this coloring has
the property that all points lying on the right or above a colored point are
colored as well. In particular, since the point (0, 0) is colored, all points
above or on the line y = 0 are colored. What we need is the number of
such colorings of T .
The border of the colored subregion C of T determines a path from (0, 0)
to (q, −p) consisting of consecutive unit moves either to the right or down-
wards. There are
p+q
p

such paths in total. We must ﬁnd the number of
such paths not going below the line l : px + qy = 0.
Consider any path \gamma = A0A1 . . . Ap+q from A0 = (0, 0) to Ap+q = (q, −p).
We shall see the path \gamma as a sequence G1G2 . . . Gp+q of moves to the right
(R) or downwards (D) with exactly p D’s and q R’s.
Two paths are said to be equivalent if one is obtained from the other by a
circular shift of the corresponding sequence G1G2 . . . Gp+q. We note that
all the p + q circular shifts of a path are distinct. Indeed, G1 . . . Gp+q \equiv
Gi+1 . . . Gi+p+q would imply G1 = Gi+1 = G2i+1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot (where Gj+p+q =
Gj), so G1 = \cdot \cdot \cdot = Gp+q, which is impossible. Hence each equivalence
class contains exactly p + q paths.
Let li, 0 \leqi < p + q, be the line through Ai that is parallel to the line l.
Since gcd(p, q) = 1, all these lines are distinct.
Let lm be the unique lowest line among the li’s. Then the path
Gm+1Gm+2 . . . Gm+p+q is above the line l. Every other cyclic shift gives
rise to a path having at least one vertex below the line l. Thus each equiv-

alence class contains exactly one path above the line l, so the number of
such paths is equal to
p+q
p+q
p

. Therefore the answer is
p+q
p+q
p

.
