---
title: "IMO 1989 SL 1"
description: "Let ABC be a triangle. The bisector of angle A meets"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1989
type: "shortlist"
number: 1
origin: "AUS"
weight: 198900001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1989 SL 1

**Origin:** AUS

## Problem

Let ABC be a triangle. The bisector of angle A meets
the circumcircle of triangle ABC in A1. Points B1 and C1 are deﬁned
similarly. Let AA1 meet the lines that bisect the two external angles at B
and C in point A0. Deﬁne B0 and C0 similarly. If SX1X2...Xn denotes the
area of the polygon X1X2 . . . Xn, prove that
SA0B0C0 = 2SAC1BA1CB1 \geq4SABC.

## Solution

Let I denote the intersection of the three internal bisectors. Then
IA1 = A1A0. One way proving this
is to realize that the circumcircle
of ABC is the nine-point circle of
A0B0C0, hence it bisects IA0, since
I is the orthocenter of A0B0C0. An-
other way is through noting that
IA1 = A1B, which follows from
\angleA1IB = \angleIBA1 = (\angleA + \angleB)/2,
and A1B = A1A0 which follows
from \angleA1A0B = \angleA1BA0 = 90◦−
A
B
C
A1
B1
C1
A0
B0
C0
I
\angleIBA1. Hence, we obtain SIA1B = SA0A1B.
Repeating this argument for the six triangles that have a vertex at
I and adding them up gives us SA0B0C0 = 2SAC1BA1CB1. To prove
SAC1BA1CB1 \geq2SABC, draw the three altitudes in triangle ABC inter-
secting in H. Let X, Y , and Z be the symmetric points of H with respect
the sides BC, CA, and AB, respectively. Then X, Y, Z are points on the
circumcircle of \triangleABC (because \angleBXC = \angleBHC = 180◦−\angleA). Since
A1 is the midpoint of the arc BC, we have SBA1C \geqSBXC. Hence
SAC1BA1CB1 \geqSAZBXCY = 2(SBHC + SCHA + SAHB) = 2SABC.
