---
title: "IMO 1989 SL 14"
description: "A bicentric quadrilateral is one that is both inscribable in"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1989
type: "shortlist"
number: 14
origin: "IND"
weight: 198900014
draft: false
---

# IMO 1989 SL 14

**Origin:** IND

## Problem

A bicentric quadrilateral is one that is both inscribable in
and circumscribable about a circle. Show that for such a quadrilateral,
the centers of the two associated circles are collinear with the point of
intersection of the diagonals.

## Solution

Lemma 1. In a quadrilateral ABCD circumscribed about a circle, with
points of tangency P, Q, R, S on DA, AB, BC, CD respectively, the
lines AC, BD, PR, QS concur.
Proof. Follows immediately, for example, from Brianchon’s theorem.
Lemma 2. Let a variable chord XY of a circle C(I, r) subtend a right angle
at a ﬁxed point Z within the circle. Then the locus of the midpoint P
of XY is a circle whose center is at the midpoint M of IZ and whose
radius is

r2/2 −IZ2/4.
Proof. From \angleXZY = 90◦follows −−\to
ZX \cdot−−\to
ZY = (−\to
IX −−\to
IZ)\cdot(−\to
IY −−\to
IZ) = 0.
Therefore,
−−\to
MP 2 = (−−\to
MI + −\to
IP)2 = 1
4(−−\to
IZ + −\to
IX + −\to
IY )2
= 1
4(IX2 + IY 2 −IZ2 + 2(−\to
IX −−\to
IZ) \cdot (−\to
IY −−\to
IZ))
= 1
2r2 −1
4IZ2.
Lemma 3.
Using notation as in Lemma 1, if ABCD is cyclic, PR is
perpendicular to QS.
Proof. Consider the inversion in C(I, r), mapping A to A′ etc. (P, Q, R, S
are ﬁxed). As is easily seen, A′, B′, C′, D′ will lie at the midpoints of
PQ, QR, RS, SP, respectively. A′B′C′D′ is a parallelogram, but also
cyclic, since inversion preserves circles; thus it must be a rectangle,
and so PR \perpQS.
Now we return to the main result. Let I and O be the incenter and circum-
center, Z the intersection of the diagonals, and P, Q, R, S, A′, B′, C′, D′
points as deﬁned in Lemmas 1 and 3. From Lemma 3, the chords
PQ, QR, RS, SP subtend 90◦at Z. Therefore by Lemma 2 the points
A′, B′, C′, D′ lie on a circle whose center is the midpoint Y of IZ. Since
this circle is the image of the circle ABCD under the considered inver-
sion (centered at I), it follows that I, O, Y are collinear, and hence so are
I, O, Z.
Remark. This is the famous Newton’s theorem for bicentric quadrilaterals.
