---
title: "IMO 1989 SL 23"
description: "We consider permutations (x1, . . . , x2n) of the set {1, . . . ,"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1989
type: "shortlist"
number: 23
origin: "POL"
weight: 198900023
draft: false
---

# IMO 1989 SL 23

**Origin:** POL

## Problem

We consider permutations (x1, . . . , x2n) of the set {1, . . . ,
2n} such that |xi ŌłÆxi+1| = n for at least one i \in{1, . . ., 2nŌłÆ1}. For every
natural number n, ’¼ünd out whether permutations with this property are
more or less numerous than the remaining permutations of {1, . . . , 2n}.

## Solution

Two numbers x, y \in{1, . . . , 2n} will be called twins if |x ŌłÆy| = n. Then
the set {1, . . . , 2n} splits into n pairs of twins. A permutation (x1, . . . , x2n)
of this set is said to be of type Tk if |xi ŌłÆxi+1| = n holds for exactly
k indices i (thus a permutation of type T0 contains no pairs of neigh-
boring twins). Denote by Fk(n) the number of Tk-type permutations of
{1, . . . , 2n}.
Let (x1, . . . , x2n) be a permutation of type T0. Removing x2n and its twin,
we obtain a permutation of 2n ŌłÆ2 elements consisting of n ŌłÆ1 pairs of
twins. This new permutation is of one of the following types:

(i) type T0: x2n can take 2n values, and its twin can take any of 2n ŌłÆ2
positions;
(ii) type T1: x2n can take any one of 2n values, but its twin must be
placed to separate the unique pair of neighboring twins in the new
permutation.
The recurrence formula follows:
F0(n) = 2n[(2n ŌłÆ2)F0(n ŌłÆ1) + F1(n ŌłÆ1)].
(1)
Now let (x1, . . . , x2n) be a permutation of type T1, and let (xj, xj+1) be
the unique neighboring twin pair. Similarly, on removing this pair we get
a permutation of 2n ŌłÆ2 elements, either of type T0 or of type T1. The
pair (xj, xj+1) is chosen out of n twin pairs and can be arranged in two
ways. Also, in the ’¼ürst case it can be placed anywhere (2n ŌłÆ1 possible
positions), but in the second case it must be placed to separate the unique
pair of neighboring twins. Hence,
F1(n) = 2n[(2n ŌłÆ1)F0(n ŌłÆ1) + F1(n ŌłÆ1)] = F0(n) + 2nF0(n ŌłÆ1). (2)
This implies that F0(n) < F1(n). Therefore the permutations with at
least one neighboring twin pair are more numerous than those with no
such pairs.
Remark 1. As in the o’¼ācial solution, formulas (1) and (2) together give
for F0 the recurrence
F0(n) = 2n[(2n ŌłÆ1)F0(n ŌłÆ1) + (2n ŌłÆ2)F0(n ŌłÆ2)].
For the ratio pn = F0(n)/(2n)!, simple algebraic manipulation yields pn =
pnŌłÆ1 +
pnŌłÆ2
(2nŌłÆ3)(2nŌłÆ1). Since p1 = 0, we get
pn < pnŌłÆ1 +
(2n ŌłÆ3)(2n ŌłÆ1) = pnŌłÆ1 +
2(2n ŌłÆ3) ŌłÆ
2(2n ŌłÆ1) < \cdot \cdot \cdot < 1
2.
Remark 2. Using the inclusionŌĆōexclusion principle, the following formula
can be obtained:
F0(n) = 20
n

(2n)! ŌłÆ21
n

(2n ŌłÆ1)! + 22
n

(2n ŌłÆ2)! ŌłÆ\cdot \cdot \cdot
\cdot \cdot \cdot + (ŌłÆ1)nŌłÆ12n
n
n

n!.
One consequence is that in fact, limn\to\inftypn = 1/e.
Second solution.
Let f : T0 \toT1 be the mapping de’¼üned as follows: if
(x1, x2, . . . , x2n) \inT0 and xk, k > 2, is the twin of x1, then
f(x1, x2, . . . , x2n) = (x2, . . . , xkŌłÆ1, x1, xk, . . . , x2n).
The mapping f is injective, but not surjective. Thus F0(n) < F1(n).
