---
title: "IMO 1989 SL 29"
description: "A ﬂock of 155 birds sit down on a circle C. Two birds Pi, Pj are"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1989
type: "shortlist"
number: 29
origin: "ROM"
weight: 198900029
draft: false
---

# IMO 1989 SL 29

**Origin:** ROM

## Problem

A ﬂock of 155 birds sit down on a circle C. Two birds Pi, Pj are
mutually visible if m(PiPj) \leq10◦. Find the smallest number of mutually
visible pairs of birds. (One assumes that a position (point) on C can be
occupied simultaneously by several birds.)

## Solution

Let Pi, sitting at the place A, and Pj sitting at B, be two birds that can
see each other. Let k and l respectively be the number of birds visible from
B but not from A, and the number of those visible from A but not from

B. Assume that k \geql. Then if all birds from B ﬂy to A, each of them will
see l new birds, but won’t see k birds anymore. Hence the total number
of mutually visible pairs does not increase, while the number of distinct
positions occupied by at least one bird decreases by one. Repeating this
operation as many times as possible one can arrive at a situation in which
two birds see each other if and only if they are in the same position. The
number of such distinct positions is at most 35, while the total number
of mutually visible pairs is not greater than at the beginning. Thus the
problem is equivalent to the following one:
(1) If xi \geq0 are integers with 35
j=1 xj = 155, ﬁnd the least possible
value of 35
j=1 (x2
j −xj)/2.
If xj \geqxi + 2 for some i, j, then the sum of (x2
j −xj)/2 decreases (for
xj −xi −2) if xi, xj are replaced with xi +1, xj −1. Consequently, our sum
attains its minimum when the xi’s diﬀer from each other by at most 1. In
this case, all the xi’s are equal to either [155/35] = 4 or [155/35] + 1 = 5,
where 155 = 20 \cdot 4 + 15 \cdot 5. It follows that the (minimum possible) number
of mutually visible pairs is 20 \cdot 4\cdot3
2 + 15 \cdot 5\cdot4
2 = 270.
Second solution for (1).
Considering the graph consisting of birds as
vertices and pairs of mutually nonvisible birds as edges, we see that there is
no complete 36-subgraph. Turan’s theorem gives the answer immediately.
(See problem (SL89-17).)
