---
title: "IMO 1989 SL 31"
description: "Let a1 \geqa2 \geqa3 be given positive integers and let N(a1, a2, a3)"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1989
type: "shortlist"
number: 31
origin: "SWE"
weight: 198900031
draft: false
---

# IMO 1989 SL 31

**Origin:** SWE

## Problem

Let a1 \geqa2 \geqa3 be given positive integers and let N(a1, a2, a3)
be the number of solutions (x1, x2, x3) of the equation
a1
x1
+ a2
x2
+ a3
x3
= 1,
where x1, x2, and x3 are positive integers. Show that
N(a1, a2, a3) \leq6a1a2(3 + ln(2a1)).

## Solution

Let us denote by Npqr the number of solutions for which ap/xp \geqaq/xq \geq
ar/xr, where (p, q, r) is one of six permutations of (1, 2, 3). It is clearly
enough to prove that Npqr + Nqpr \leq2a1a2(3 + ln(2a1)).
First, from
3ap
xp
\geqap
xp
+ aq
xq
+ ar
xr
= 1
and
ap
xp
< 1
we get ap + 1 \leqxp \leq3ap. Similarly, for ﬁxed xp we have
2aq
xq
\geqaq
xq
+ ar
xr
= 1 −ap
xp
and
aq
xq
\leqmin
ap
xp
, 1 −ap
xp

,

which gives max {aq \cdot xp/ap, aq \cdot xp/(xp −ap)} \leqxq \leq2aq \cdot xp/(xp −ap),
i.e., if ap +1 \leqxp \leq2ap there are at most aq \cdot xp/(xp −ap)+1/2 possible
values for xq (because there are [2x] −[x] = [x + 1/2] integers between x
and 2x), and if 2ap+1 \leqxp \leq3ap, at most 2aq \cdot xp/(xp −ap)−aq \cdot xp/ap+
1 possible values. Given xp and xq, xr is uniquely determined. Hence
Npqr \leq
2ap

xp=ap+1
 aq \cdot xp
xp −ap
+ 1

+
3ap

xp=2ap+1
2aq \cdot xp
xp −ap
−aq \cdot xp
ap
+ 1

= 3ap
+ aq
ap

k=1
k + ap
k
+
2(k + 2ap)
k + ap
−k + 2ap
ap

= 3ap
+ aq
ap

k=1

1 −k
ap
+ ap
 1
k +
k + ap

= 3ap
−aq
2 + apaq

2 +
ap

k=1
1
k +
k + ap

\leqapaq
 3
2aq
−
2ap
+ ln(2ap) + 5
2 −ln 2

,
where we have used n
k=1 (1/k + 2/(k + n)) \leqln(2n) + 2 −ln 2 (this can
be proved by induction). Hence,
Npqr + Nqpr \leq2apaq(1 + 0.5 + ln(2ap) + 2 −ln2) < 2a1a2(2.81 + ln(2a1)).
Remark.
The oﬃcial solution was somewhat simpler, but used that
the interval (x, 2x], for real x, cannot contain more than x integers,
which is false in general. Thus it could give only a weaker estimate
N \leq6a1a2 (9/2 −ln 2 + ln(2a1)).
