---
title: "IMO 1989 SL 8"
description: "Let R be a rectangle that is the union of a ﬁnite number of"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1989
type: "shortlist"
number: 8
origin: "FRA"
weight: 198900008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1989 SL 8

**Origin:** FRA

## Problem

Let R be a rectangle that is the union of a ﬁnite number of
rectangles Ri, 1 \leqi \leqn, satisfying the following conditions:
(i) The sides of every rectangle Ri are parallel to the sides of R.
(ii) The interiors of any two diﬀerent Ri are disjoint.
(iii) Every Ri has at least one side of integral length.
Prove that R has at least one side of integral length.

## Solution

Let A, B, C, D denote the vertices of R. We consider the set S of all points
E of the plane that are vertices of at least one rectangle, and its subset
S′ consisting of those points in S that have both coordinates integral in
the orthonormal coordinate system with point A as the origin and lines
AB, AD as axes.
First, to each E \inS we can assign an integer nE as the number of
rectangles Ri with one vertex at E. It is easy to check that nE = 1 if E
is one of the vertices A, B, C, D; in all other cases nE is either 2 or 4.
Furthermore, for each rectangle Ri we deﬁne f(Ri) as the number of
vertices of Ri that belong to S′. Since every Ri has at least one side of
integer length, f(Ri) can take only values 0, 2, or 4. Therefore we have

n

i=1
f(Ri) \equiv0 (mod 2).
On the other hand, n
i=1 f(Ri) is equal to 
E\inS′ nE, implying that

E\inS′
nE \equiv0 (mod 2).
However, since nA = 1, at least one other nE, where E \inS′, must be odd,
and that can happen only for E being B, C, or D. We conclude that at
least one of the sides of R has integral length.
Second solution. Consider the coordinate system introduced above. If D
is a rectangle whose sides are parallel to the axes of the system, it is easy
to prove that
A
D
sin 2\pix sin 2\piy dx dy = 0
if and only if at least one side of D has integral length. This holds for all
Ri’s, so that adding up these equalities we get
=
R sin 2\pix sin 2\piy dx dy = 0.
Thus, R also has a side of integral length.
