---
title: "IMO 1999 SL A3"
description: "A game is played by n girls (n \geq2), everybody having a ball."
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 3
origin: "FIN"
weight: 199901003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL A3

**Origin:** FIN  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

A game is played by n girls (n \geq2), everybody having a ball.
Each of the
n

pairs of players, in an arbitrary order, exchange the balls
they have at that moment. The game is called nice if at the end nobody
has her own ball, and it is called tiresome if at the end everybody has her
initial ball. Determine the values of n for which there exists a nice game
and those for which there exists a tiresome game.

## Solution

A game is determined by the ordering t1, . . . , tN of the N =
n

transpo-
sitions (i, j) of the set {1, 2, . . ., n}. The game is nice if the permutation
P = tNtN−1 . . . t1 has no ﬁxed point, and tiresome if P is the identity
(denoted by I). Recall that every permutation can be written as a com-
position of disjoint cycles.
We claim that there exists a nice game if and only if n ̸= 3.
For n = 2, P2 = t1 = (1, 2) is obviously nice. For n = 3 each game
has the form P = (b, c)(a, c)(a, b) = (a, c) for an appropriate nota-
tion of the players, which cannot be nice. Now for n \geq4 we deﬁne

Pn = (1, 2)(1, 3)(2, 3) \cdot \cdot \cdot(1, n)(2, n) \cdot \cdot \cdot (n −1, n). We obtain inductively
that Pn = Pn−1(1, n, n −1, . . . , 2) = (1, n)(2, n −1) \cdot \cdot \cdot (i, n + 1 −i) \cdot \cdot \cdot is
nice for all even n.
Also, if n = 2k+1 is odd, then Qn = Pn−1(1, n)(2, n) \cdot \cdot \cdot (k, n)(n−1, n)(n−
2, n) \cdot \cdot \cdot (k + 1, n) maps i to n + 1 −i for i \leqk, to n −1 −i for k + 1 \leq
i \leq2k −1, and to 3k + 1 −i if i \in{2k, 2k + 1}. Hence Qn is nice. This
justiﬁes our claim.
Now we prove that a tiresome game exists if and only if n \equiv0, 1 (mod 4).
Evidently every transposition changes the sign of the permutation. Thus
the sign of P is (−1)(
n
2) and for P to be the identity we must have 2 |
n

⇒n \equiv0, 1(mod 4).
Let us now construct tiresome games for the allowed n. For n = 4k we
divide the girls into groups of 4. In each group we perform the following
game: (3, 4)(1, 3)(2, 4)(2, 3)(1, 4)(1, 2) = I. On the other hand, among two
diﬀerent groups (call them {1, 2, 3, 4} and {5, 6, 7, 8}) we perform
(4, 7)(3, 7)(4, 6)(1, 6)(2, 8)(3, 8)(2, 7)(2, 6)
(4, 5)(4, 8)(1, 7)(1, 8)(3, 5)(3, 6)(2, 5)(1, 5) = I.
For n = 4k + 1 we divide into groups of four as before, with one girl
remaining. Every time a group (denoted {1, 2, 3, 4}) is to play a game the
remaining girl (denoted 5) joins in, and they play
(3, 5)(3, 4)(4, 5)(1, 3)(2, 4)(2, 3)(1, 4)(1, 5)(1, 2)(2, 5) = I.
This completes the proof.
