---
title: "IMO 1999 SL A4"
description: "Prove that the set of positive integers cannot be partitioned"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "algebra"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "A"
category_name: "Algebra"
number: 4
origin: "BLR"
weight: 199901004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL A4

**Origin:** BLR  |  **Category:** Algebra

## Problem

Prove that the set of positive integers cannot be partitioned
into three nonempty subsets such that for any two integers x, y taken from
two diﬀerent subsets, the number x2 −xy +y2 belongs to the third subset.

## Solution

Deﬁne f(x, y) = x2 −xy + y2. Let us assume that three such sets A, B,
and C do exist and that w.l.o.g. 1, b, and c (c > b) are respectively their
smallest elements.
Lemma 1. Numbers x, y, and x + y cannot belong to three diﬀerent sets.
Proof. The number f(x, x + y) = f(y, x + y) must belong to both the set
containing y and the set containing x, a contradiction.
Lemma 2. The subset C contains a multiple of b. Moreover, if kb is the
smallest such multiple, then (k −1)b \inB and (k −1)b + 1, kb + 1 \inA.
Proof. Let r be the residue of c modulo b. If r = 0, the ﬁrst statement
automatically holds. Let 0 < r < b. In that case r \inA, and c −r
is then not in B according to Lemma 1. Hence c −r \inA and since
b | c −r, it follows that b | f(c −r, b) \inC, thus proving the ﬁrst
statement. It follows immediately from Lemma 1 that (k −1)b \inB.
Now by Lemma 1, (k −1)b + 1 = kb −(b −1) must be in A; similarly,
kb + 1 = [(k −1)b + 1] + b \inA as well.
Let us show by induction that (nk −1)b + 1, nkb + 1 \inA for all integers
n. The inductive basis has been shown in Lemma 2. Assuming that [(n −
1)k −1]b + 1 \inA and (n −1)kb + 1 \inA, we get that (nk −1)b + 1 =
((n −1)kb + 1) + (k −1)b = [((n −1)k −1)b + 1] + kb belongs to A and

nkb + 1 = ((nk −1)b + 1) + b = ((n −1)kb + 1) + kb ⇒nkb + 1 \inA. This
ﬁnishes the inductive step. In particular, f(kb, kb+1) = (kb+1)kb+1 \inA.
However, since kb \inC, kb+1 \inA, it follows that f(kb, kb+1) \inB, which
is a contradiction.
