---
title: "IMO 1999 SL C1"
description: "Let n \geq1 be an integer. A path from (0, 0) to (n, n) in the"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 1
origin: "IND"
weight: 199902001
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL C1

**Origin:** IND  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let n \geq1 be an integer. A path from (0, 0) to (n, n) in the
xy plane is a chain of consecutive unit moves either to the right (move
denoted by E) or upwards (move denoted by N), all the moves being
made inside the half-plane x \geqy. A step in a path is the occurrence of
two consecutive moves of the form EN.
Show that the number of paths from (0, 0) to (n, n) that contain exactly
s steps (n \geqs \geq1) is
s
n ŌłÆ1
s ŌłÆ1
 n
s ŌłÆ1

.

## Solution

Let us call f(n, s) the number of paths from (0, 0) to (n, n) that contain
exactly s steps. Evidently, for all n we have f(n, 1) = f(2, 2) = 1, in
accordance with the formula. Let us thus assume inductively for a given
n > 2 that for all s we have f(n, s) = 1
s
nŌłÆ1
sŌłÆ1
 n
sŌłÆ1

. We shall prove that
the given formula holds also for all f(n + 1, s), where s \geq2.
We say that an (n+ 1, s)- or (n+ 1, s+ 1)-path is related to a given (n, s)-
path if it is obtained from the given path by inserting a step EN between
two moves or at the beginning or the end of the path. We note that by
inserting the step between two moves that form a step one obtains an
(n + 1, s)-path; in all other cases one obtains an (n + 1, s + 1)-path. For
each (n, s)-path there are exactly 2n + 1 ŌłÆs related (n + 1, s + 1)-paths,
and for each (n, s + 1)-path there are s + 1 related (n + 1, s + 1)-paths.
Also, each (n + 1, s + 1)-path is related to exactly s + 1 di’¼Ćerent (n, s)- or
(n, s + 1)-paths. Thus:
(s + 1)f(n + 1, s + 1) = (2n + 1 ŌłÆs)f(n, s) + (s + 1)f(n, s + 1)
= 2n + 1 ŌłÆs
s
n ŌłÆ1
s ŌłÆ1
 n
s ŌłÆ1

+
n ŌłÆ1
s
n
s

=
n
s
n + 1
s

,
i.e., f(n + 1, s + 1) =
s+1
n
s
n+1
s

. This completes the proof.
