---
title: "IMO 1999 SL C3"
description: "A biologist watches a chameleon. The chameleon catches"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 3
origin: "GBR"
weight: 199902003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL C3

**Origin:** GBR  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

A biologist watches a chameleon. The chameleon catches
ﬂies and rests after each catch. The biologist notices that:
(i) the ﬁrst ﬂy is caught after a resting period of one minute;
(ii) the resting period before catching the 2mth ﬂy is the same as the
resting period before catching the mth ﬂy and one minute shorter
than the resting period before catching the (2m + 1)th ﬂy;
(iii) when the chameleon stops resting, he catches a ﬂy instantly.
(a) How many ﬂies were caught by the chameleon before his ﬁrst resting
period of 9 minutes?
(b) After how many minutes will the chameleon catch his 98th ﬂy?
(c) How many ﬂies were caught by the chameleon after 1999 minutes
passed?

## Solution

Let r(m) denote the rest period before the mth catch, t(m) the number of
minutes before the mth catch, and f(n) as the number of ﬂies caught in
n minutes. We have r(1) = 1, r(2m) = r(m), and r(2m + 1) = f(m) + 1.
We then have by induction that r(m) is the number of ones in the binary
representation of m. We also have t(m) = m
i=1 r(i) and f(t(m)) = m.
From the recursive relations for r we easily derive t(2m+1) = 2t(m)+m+1
and consequently t(2m) = 2t(m) + m −r(m). We then have, by induction
on p, t(2pm) = 2pt(m) + p \cdot m \cdot 2p−1 −(2p −1)r(m).
(a) We must ﬁnd the smallest number m such that r(m + 1) = 9. The
smallest number with nine binary digits is 1111111112 = 511; hence
the required m is 510.
(b) We must calculate t(98). Using the recursive formulas we have t(98) =
2t(49)+49−r(49), t(49) = 2t(24)+25, and t(24) = 8t(3)+36−7r(3).
Since we have t(3) = 4, r(3) = 2 and r(49) = r(1100012) = 3, it
follows t(24) = 54 ⇒t(49) = 133 ⇒t(98) = 312.
(c) We must ﬁnd mc such that t(mc) \leq1999 < t(mc + 1). One can
estimate where this occurs using the formula t(2p(2q −1)) = (p +
q)2p+q−1 −p 2p−1 −q 2p + q, provable from the recursive relations. It
suﬃces to note that t(462) = 1993 and t(463) = 2000; hence mc = 462.
