---
title: "IMO 1999 SL C7"
description: "Let p > 3 be a prime number. For each nonempty subset T of"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "combinatorics"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "C"
category_name: "Combinatorics"
number: 7
origin: "IRE"
weight: 199902007
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL C7

**Origin:** IRE  |  **Category:** Combinatorics

## Problem

Let p > 3 be a prime number. For each nonempty subset T of
{0, 1, 2, 3, . . ., pŌłÆ1} let E(T ) be the set of all (pŌłÆ1)-tuples (x1, . . . , xpŌłÆ1),
where each xi \inT and x1 + 2x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + (p ŌłÆ1)xpŌłÆ1 is divisible by p and
let |E(T )| denote the number of elements in E(T ).
Prove that
|E({0, 1, 3})| \geq|E({0, 1, 2})|,
with equality if and only if p = 5.

## Solution

Denote A = {0, 1, 2} and B = {0, 1, 3}. Let fT (x) = 
a\inT xa. Then de’¼üne
FT (x) = fT (x)fT (x2) \cdot \cdot \cdot fT (xpŌłÆ1). We can write FT (x) = p(pŌłÆ1)
i=0
aixi,
where ai is the number of ways to select an array {x1, . . . , xpŌłÆ1} where
xi \inT for all i and x1 + 2x2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + (p ŌłÆ1)xpŌłÆ1 = i. Let w = cos(2\pi/p) +
i sin(2\pi/p), a pth root of unity. Noting that
1 + wj + w2j + \cdot \cdot \cdot + w(pŌłÆ1)j =
.
p, p | j,
0, p Ōłżj,
it follows that FT (1) + FT (w) + \cdot \cdot \cdot + FT (wpŌłÆ1) = pE(T ).
Since |A| = |B| = 3, it follows that FA(1) = FB(1) = 3pŌłÆ1. We also have
for p Ōłżi, j that FT (wi) = FT (w). Finally, we have
FA(w) =
pŌłÆ1
-
i=1
(1 + wi + w2i) =
pŌłÆ1
-
i=1
1 ŌłÆw3i
1 ŌłÆwi = 1.
Hence, combining these results, we obtain
E(A) = 3pŌłÆ1 + p ŌłÆ1
p
and E(B) = 3pŌłÆ1 + (p ŌłÆ1)FB(w)
p
.
It remains to demonstrate that FB(w) \geq1 for all p and that equality
holds only for p = 5. Since E(B) is an integer, it follows that FB(w) is an
integer and FB(w) \equiv1 (mod p). Since fB(wpŌłÆi) = fB(wi), it follows that
FB(w) = |fB(w)|2 

fB(w2)
2 \cdot \cdot \cdot
fB

w(pŌłÆ1)/2

2 > 0. Hence FB(w) \geq1.

It remains to show that FB(w) = 1 if and only if p = 5. We have the
formula (xŌłÆw)(xŌłÆw2) \cdot \cdot \cdot (xŌłÆwpŌłÆ1) = xpŌłÆ1 +xpŌłÆ2 +\cdot \cdot \cdot+x+1 = xpŌłÆ1
xŌłÆ1 .
Let fB(x) = x3 + x + 1 = (x ŌłÆ\lambda)(x ŌłÆ┬Ą)(x ŌłÆ\nu), where \lambda, ┬Ą, and \nu are
the three zeros of the polynomial fB(x). It follows that
FB(w) =
\lambdap ŌłÆ1
\lambda ŌłÆ1
 ┬Ąp ŌłÆ1
┬Ą ŌłÆ1
 \nup ŌłÆ1
\nu ŌłÆ1

= ŌłÆ1
3(\lambdap ŌłÆ1)(┬Ąp ŌłÆ1)(\nup ŌłÆ1),
since (\lambda ŌłÆ1)(┬Ą ŌłÆ1)(\nu ŌłÆ1) = ŌłÆfB(1) = ŌłÆ3. We also have \lambda + ┬Ą + \nu = 0,
\lambda┬Ą\nu = ŌłÆ1, \lambda┬Ą + \lambda\nu + ┬Ą\nu = 1, and \lambda2 + ┬Ą2 + \nu2 = (\lambda + ┬Ą + \nu)2 ŌłÆ2(\lambda┬Ą +
\lambda\nu + ┬Ą\nu) = ŌłÆ2. By induction (using that (\lambdar + ┬Ąr + \nur) + (\lambdarŌłÆ2 + ┬ĄrŌłÆ2 +
\nurŌłÆ2)+(\lambdarŌłÆ3+┬ĄrŌłÆ3+\nurŌłÆ3) = 0), it follows that \lambdar +┬Ąr +\nur is an integer
for all r \inN.
Let us assume FB(x) = 1. It follows that (\lambdap ŌłÆ1)(┬Ąp ŌłÆ1)(\nup ŌłÆ1) = ŌłÆ3.
Hence \lambdap, ┬Ąp, \nup are roots of the polynomial p(x) = x3ŌłÆqx2+(1+q)x+1,
where q = \lambdap + ┬Ąp + \nup. Since fB(x) is an increasing function in real
numbers, it follows that it has only one real root (w.l.o.g.) \lambda, the other
two roots being complex conjugates. From fB(ŌłÆ1) < 0 < fB(ŌłÆ1/2) it
follows that ŌłÆ1 < \lambda < ŌłÆ1/2. It also follows that \lambdap is the x coordinate
of the intersection of functions y = x3 + x + 1 and y = q(x2 ŌłÆx). Since
\lambda < \lambdap < 0, it follows that q > 0; otherwise, q(x2 ŌłÆx) intersects x3 +x+1
at a value smaller than \lambda. Additionally, as p increases, \lambdap approaches 0,
and hence q must increase.
For p = 5 we have 1+w+w3 = ŌłÆw2(1+w2) and hence G(w) = $pŌłÆ1
i=1 (1+
w2j) = 1. For a zero of fB(x) we have x5 = ŌłÆx3 ŌłÆx2 = ŌłÆx2 + x + 1 and
hence q = \lambda5 + ┬Ą5 + \nu5 = ŌłÆ(\lambda2 + ┬Ą2 + \nu2) + (\lambda + ┬Ą + \nu) + 3 = 5.
For p > 5 we also have q \geq6. Assuming again FB(x) = 1 and de’¼üning
p(x) as before, we have p(ŌłÆ1) < 0, p(0) > 0, p(2) < 0, and p(x) > 0 for a
su’¼āciently large x > 2. It follows that p(x) must have three distinct real
roots. However, since ┬Ąp, \nup \inR ŌćÆ\nup = ┬Ąp = ┬Ąp, it follows that p(x)
has at most two real roots, which is a contradiction. Hence, it follows that
FB(x) > 1 for p > 5 and thus E(A) \leqE(B), where equality holds only
for p = 5.
