---
title: "IMO 1999 SL G2"
description: "A circle is called a separator for a set of ﬁve points in a plane"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 2
origin: "JAP"
weight: 199903002
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL G2

**Origin:** JAP  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

A circle is called a separator for a set of ﬁve points in a plane
if it passes through three of these points, it contains a fourth point in its
interior, and the ﬁfth point is outside the circle.
Prove that every set of ﬁve points such that no three are collinear and no
four are concyclic has exactly four separators.

## Solution

Let A, B, C, and D be inverses of four of the ﬁve points, with the ﬁfth
point being the pole of the inversion. A separator through the pole trans-
forms into a line containing two of the remaining four points such that
the remaining two points are on opposite sides of the line. A separator not
containing the pole transforms into a circle through three of the points
with the fourth point in its interior. Let K be the convex hull of A, B, C,
and D. We observe two cases:
(i) K is a quadrilateral, for example ABCD. In that case the four sep-
arators are the two diagonals and two circles ABC and ADC if
\angleA + \angleC < 180◦, or BAD and BCD otherwise. The remaining six
viable circles and lines are clearly not separators.
(ii) K is a triangle, for example ABC with D in its interior. In that case
the separators are lines DA, DB, DC and the circle ABC. No other
lines and circles qualify.
We have thus shown that any set of ﬁve points satisfying the stated con-
ditions will have exactly four separators.
