---
title: "IMO 1999 SL G3"
description: "A set S of points in space will be called completely sym-"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 3
origin: "EST"
weight: 199903003
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL G3

**Origin:** EST  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

A set S of points in space will be called completely sym-
metric if it has at least three elements and satisﬁes the following condition:
For every two distinct points A, B from S the perpendicular bisector of
the segment AB is an axis of symmetry for S.
Prove that if a completely symmetric set is ﬁnite, then it consists of the
vertices of either a regular polygon, a regular tetrahedron, or a regular
octahedron.

## Solution

Let rPQ denote a reﬂection about the planar bisector of PQ with P, Q \inS.
Let G be the centroid of S. From rPQ(S) = S it follows that rPQ(G) = G.
Hence G belongs to the perpendicular bisector of PQ and thus GP = GQ.
Consequently the whole of S lies on a sphere \Sigma centered at G. We note
the following two cases:
(a) S is a subset of a plane \pi. In this case S is included in a circle k, G be-
ing its center. Hence its n points form a convex polygon A1A2 . . . An.
When applying rAiAi+2 for some 0 < i < n −1 the point Ai+1 trans-
forms into some point of S lying on the same side of AiAi+1, which
has to be Ai+1 itself. It thus follows that AiAi+1 = Ai+1Ai+2 for all
0 < i < n −1 and hence A1A2 . . . An is a regular n-gon.
(b) The points in S are not coplanar. It follows that S is a polyhedron
P inscribed in a sphere \Sigma centered at G. By applying the previous
case to the faces of the polyhedron, it follows that all faces are regular
n-gons.
Let us take an arbitrary vertex V and let V V1, V V2 and V V3 be three
consecutive edges stemming from V
(V , V1, V2, and V3 deﬁning two
adjacent faces of P). We now look at rV1V3. Since this transformation
leaves the half-planes [V1V3, V2 and [V1V3, V invariant and since V2
and V are the only points of P on the respective half-planes, it fol-
lows that rV1V3 leaves V and V2 invariant. This transform also swaps
V1 and V3. Hence, the face determined by V V1V2 is transformed by
rV1V3 into the face V V3V2, and thus the two faces sharing V V2 are
congruent. We conclude that all faces are congruent and similarly
that vertices are endpoints of the same number of edges; hence P is a
regular polyhedron.
Finally, we have to rule out S being vertices of a cube, a dodecahedron,
or an icosahedron. In all of these cases if we select two diametrically

opposite points P and Q, then S\{P, Q} is not symmetric with respect
to the bisector of PQ, which prevents rPQ from being an invariant
transformation of S.
It thus follows that the only viable ﬁnite completely symmetric sets are
vertices of regular n-gons, the tetrahedron, and the octahedron. It is not
explicitly asked for, but it is easy to verify that all of these are indeed
completely symmetric.
Remark.
On the IMO, a simpler version of this problem was adopted,
adding the condition that S belongs to a plane and thus eliminating the
need for the second case altogether.
