---
title: "IMO 1999 SL G4"
description: "For a triangle T = ABC we take the point X on the side"
date: "2026-05-29T15:05:12+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 4
origin: "GBR"
weight: 199903004
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL G4

**Origin:** GBR  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

For a triangle T = ABC we take the point X on the side
(AB) such that AX/XB = 4/5, the point Y on the segment (CX) such
that CY = 2Y X, and, if possible, the point Z on the ray (CA such that
∡CXZ = 180◦−∡ABC. We denote by \Sigma the set of all triangles T for
which ∡XY Z = 45◦.
Prove that all the triangles from \Sigma are similar and ﬁnd the measure of
their smallest angle.

## Solution

We use the following lemma.
Lemma. Let ABC be a triangle and X \inAB such that −−\to
AX : −−\to
XB = m : n.
Then (m + n) cot \angleCXB = n cot A −m cot B and m cot \angleACX =
(n + m) cot C + n cot A.
Proof. Let CD be the altitude from C and h its length. Then using oriented
segments we have AX = AD + DX = h cot A −h cot \angleCXB and
BX = BD + DX = h cot B + h cot \angleCXB. The ﬁrst formula in
the lemma now follows from n \cdot AX = m \cdot BX. The second formula
immediately follows from the ﬁrst part applied to the triangle ACX
and the point X′ \inAC such that XX′ \parallelBC.
Let us set cot A = x, cot B = y, and cot C = z. Applying the second for-
mula in the lemma to \triangleABC and the point X, we obtain 4 cot \angleACX =
9z+5x. Applying the ﬁrst formula in the lemma to \triangleCXZ and the point Y
and using \angleXY Z = 45◦and cot \angleCXZ = −y, we obtain 3 cot \angleXY Z =
cot \angleACX −2 cot \angleCXZ = 9z+5x
+ 2y ⇒5x + 8y + 9z = 12.
We now use the well-known relation for cotangents of a triangle xy +yz +
xz = 1 to get 9 = 9(x + y)z + 9xy = (x + y)(12 −5x −8z) + 9xy = 9 ⇒
(4y + x −3)2 + 9(x −1)2 = 0 ⇒x = 1, y = 1
2, z = 1
3. It follows that
x, y, and z have ﬁxed values, and hence all triangles T in \Sigma are similar,
with their smallest angle A having cotangent 1 and thus being equal to
\angleA = 45◦.
