---
title: "IMO 1999 SL G6"
description: "Two circles Ω1 and Ω2 touch internally the circle Ωin"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 6
origin: "RUS"
weight: 199903006
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL G6

**Origin:** RUS  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Two circles Ω1 and Ω2 touch internally the circle Ωin
M and N, and the center of Ω2 is on Ω1. The common chord of the circles
Ω1 and Ω2 intersects Ωin A and B. MA and MB intersect Ω1 in C and
D. Prove that Ω2 is tangent to CD.

## Solution

We ﬁrst introduce the following lemmas.

Lemma 1.
Let ABC be a triangle, I its inenter and Ia the center of
the excircle touching BC. Let A′ be the center of the arc :
BC of the
circumcircle not containing A. Then A′B = A′C = A′I = A′Ia.
Proof. The result follows from a straightforward calculation of the relevant
angles.
Lemma 2. Let two circles k1 and k2 meet each other at points X and Y
and touch a circle k internally in points M and N, respectively. Let
A be one of the intersections of the line XY with k. Let AM and AN
intersect k1 and k2 respectively at C and E. Then CE is a common
tangent of k1 and k2.
Proof. Since AC\cdotAM = AX\cdotAY = AE\cdotAN, the points M, N, E, C lie on
a circle. Let MN meet k1 again at Z. If M ′ is any point on the common
tangent at M, then \angleMCZ = \angleM ′MZ = \angleM ′MN = \angleMAN (as
oriented angles), implying that CZ \parallelAN. It follows that \angleACE =
\angleANM = \angleCZM. Hence CE is tangent to k1 and analogously to k2.
In the main problem, let us deﬁne E and F respectively as intersections
of NA and NB with Ω2. Then applying Lemma 2 we get that CE and
DF are the common tangents of Ω1 and Ω2.
If the circles have the same radii,
the result trivially holds. Otherwise,
let G be the intersection of CE and
DF. Let O1 and O2 be the centers
of Ω1 and Ω2. Since O1D = O1C
and \angleO1DG = \angleO1CG = 90◦, it
follows that O1 is the midpoint of
the shorter arc of the circumcircle
of \triangleCDG. The center O2 is located
on the bisector of \angleCGD, since Ω2
touches both GC and GD.
O
O1
O2
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
M
N
X
Y
However, it also sits on Ω1, and using Lemma 1 we obtain that O2 is
either at the incenter or at the excenter of \triangleCDG opposite G. Hence,
Ω2 is either the incircle or the excircle of CDG and thus in both cases
touches CD.
Second solution.
Let O be the center of \Gamma, and r, r1, r2 the radii of
\Gamma, \Gamma1, \Gamma2. It suﬃces to show that the distance d(O2, CD) is equal to r2.
The homothety with center M and ratio r/r1 takes \Gamma1, C, D into \Gamma, A, B,
respectively; hence CD \parallelAB and d(C, AB) = r−r1
r
d(M, AB). Let O1O2
meet XY at R. Then d(O2, CD) = O2R + r−r1
r
d(M, AB), i.e.,
d(O2, CD) = O2R + r −r1
r
[O1O2 −O2R + r1 cos \angleOO1O2],
(1)
since O, O1, and M are collinear. We have O1X = O1O2 = r1, OO1 =
r −r1, OO2 = r −r2, and O2X = r2. Using the cosine law in the triangles
OO1O2 and XO1O2, we obtain that cos \angleOO1O2 = 2r2
1−2rr1+2rr2−r2
2r1(r−r1)
and
O2R =
r2
2r1 . Substituting these values in (1) we get d(O2, CD) = r2.
