---
title: "IMO 1999 SL G8"
description: "Points A, B, C divide the circumcircle Ωof the triangle ABC"
date: "2026-05-29T11:51:26+07:00"
tags: ["imo", "shortlist", "mathematics", "olympiad", "geometry"]
categories: ["mathematics"]
year: 1999
type: "shortlist"
category: "G"
category_name: "Geometry"
number: 8
origin: "RUS"
weight: 199903008
draft: false
---

# IMO 1999 SL G8

**Origin:** RUS  |  **Category:** Geometry

## Problem

Points A, B, C divide the circumcircle Ωof the triangle ABC
into three arcs. Let X be a variable point on the arc AB, and let O1, O2 be
the incenters of the triangles CAX and CBX. Prove that the circumcircle
of the triangle XO1O2 intersects Ωin a ﬁxed point.

## Solution

We ﬁrst introduce the same lemma as in problem 12 and state it here
without proof.
Lemma. Let ABC be a triangle and I the center of its incircle. Let M be
the center of the arc :
BC of the circumcircle not containing A. Then
MB = MC = MI.
Let the circle XO1O2 intersect the circle Ωagain at point T . Let M
and N be respectively the midpoints of arcs :
BC and :
AC, and let P
be the intersection of Ωand the line through C parallel to MN. Then
the lemma gives MP
= NC = NI = NO1 and NP
= MC =
MI = MO2. Since O1 and O2 lie on XN and XM respectively, we
have \angleNTM = \angleNXM = \angleO1XO2 = \angleO1TO2 and hence \angleNTO1 =
\angleMTO2. Moreover, \angleTNO1 = \angleTNX = \angleTMO2, from which it fol-
lows that \triangleO1NT ∼\triangleO2MT . Thus
NT
MP =
NT
NO1 =
MT
MO2 =
MT
NP ⇒
MP \cdot MT = NP \cdot NT ⇒SMPT = SNPT . It follows that TP bisects the
segment MN, and hence it passes through I. We conclude that T belongs
to the line PI and does not depend on X.
Remark. An alternative approach is to apply an inversion at point C.
Points O1 and O2 become excenters of \triangleAXC and \triangleBXC, and T be-
comes the projection of Ic onto AB.
